summer of 1898 he (Bloom) had marked a florin (2/-) with three notches
on the milled edge and tendered it m payment of an account due to and
received by J. and T. Davy, family grocers, 1 Charlemont Mall, Grand
Canal, for circulation on the waters of civic finance, for possible,
circuitous or direct, return.


Was the clown Bloom's son?

No.


Had Bloom's coin returned?

Never.


Why would a recurrent frustration the more depress him?

Because at the critical turningpoint of human existence he desired to
amend many social conditions, the product of inequality and avarice and
international animosity. He believed then that human life was infinitely
perfectible, eliminating these conditions?

There remained the generic conditions imposed by natural, as distinct
from human law, as integral parts of the human whole: the necessity of
destruction to procure alimentary sustenance: the painful character of
the ultimate functions of separate existence, the agonies of birth and
death: the monotonous menstruation of simian and (particularly) human
females extending from the age of puberty to the menopause: inevitable
accidents at sea, in mines and factories: certain very painful maladies
and their resultant surgical operations, innate lunacy and congenital
criminality, decimating epidemics: catastrophic cataclysms which make
terror the basis of human mentality: seismic upheavals the epicentres
of which are located in densely populated regions: the fact of vital
growth, through convulsions of metamorphosis, from infancy through
maturity to decay.


Why did he desist from speculation?

Because it was a task for a superior intelligence to substitute other
more acceptable phenomena in the place of the less acceptable phenomena
to be removed.


Did Stephen participate in his dejection?

He affirmed his significance as a conscious rational animal proceeding
syllogistically from the known to the unknown and a conscious rational
reagent between a micro and a macrocosm ineluctably constructed upon the
incertitude of the void.


Was this affirmation apprehended by Bloom?

Not verbally. Substantially.


What comforted his misapprehension?

That as a competent keyless citizen he had proceeded energetically from
the unknown to the known through the incertitude of the void.


In what order of precedence, with what attendant ceremony was the exodus
from the house of bondage to the wilderness of inhabitation effected?

Lighted Candle in Stick borne by

BLOOM

Diaconal Hat on Ashplant borne by

STEPHEN:


With what intonation secreto of what commemorative psalm?

The 113th, _modus peregrinus: In exitu Israel de Egypto: domus Jacob de
populo barbaro_.


What did each do at the door of egress?

Bloom set the candlestick on the floor. Stephen put the hat on his head.


For what creature was the door of egress a door of ingress?

For a cat.


What spectacle confronted them when they, first the host, then the
guest, emerged silently, doubly dark, from obscurity by a passage from
the rere of the house into the penumbra of the garden?

The heaventree of stars hung with humid nightblue fruit.


With what meditations did Bloom accompany his demonstration to his
companion of various constellations?

Meditations of evolution increasingly vaster: of the moon invisible in
incipient lunation, approaching perigee: of the infinite lattiginous
scintillating uncondensed milky way, discernible by daylight by an
observer placed at the lower end of a cylindrical vertical shaft 5000
ft deep sunk from the surface towards the centre of the earth: of Sirius
(alpha in Canis Maior) 10 lightyears (57,000,000,000,000 miles) distant
and in volume 900 times the dimension of our planet: of Arcturus: of the
precession of equinoxes: of Orion with belt and sextuple sun theta and
nebula in which 100 of our solar systems could be contained: of moribund
and of nascent new stars such as Nova in 1901: of our system plunging
towards the constellation of Hercules: of the parallax or parallactic
drift of socalled fixed stars, in reality evermoving wanderers from
immeasurably remote eons to infinitely remote futures in comparison with
which the years, threescore and ten, of allotted human life formed a
parenthesis of infinitesimal brevity.


Were there obverse meditations of involution increasingly less vast?

Of the eons of geological periods recorded in the stratifications of the
earth: of the myriad minute entomological organic existences concealed
in cavities of the earth, beneath removable stones, in hives and mounds,
of microbes, germs, bacteria, bacilli, spermatozoa: of the incalculable
trillions of billions of millions of imperceptible molecules contained
by cohesion of molecular affinity in a single pinhead: of the universe
of human serum constellated with red and white bodies, themselves
universes of void space constellated with other bodies, each, in
continuity, its universe of divisible component bodies of which each was
again divisible in divisions of redivisible component bodies, dividends
and divisors ever diminishing without actual division till, if the
progress were carried far enough, nought nowhere was never reached.


Why did he not elaborate these calculations to a more precise result?

Because some years previously in 1886 when occupied with the problem
of the quadrature of the circle he had learned of the existence of a
number computed to a relative degree of accuracy to be of such magnitude
and of so many places, e.g., the 9th power of the 9th power of 9, that,
the result having been obtained, 33 closely printed volumes of 1000
pages each of innumerable quires and reams of India paper would have to
be requisitioned in order to contain the complete tale of its printed
integers of units, tens, hundreds, thousands, tens of thousands,
hundreds of thousands, millions, tens of millions, hundreds of millions,
billions, the nucleus of the nebula of every digit of every series
containing succinctly the potentiality of being raised to the utmost
kinetic elaboration of any power of any of its powers.


Did he find the problems of the inhabitability of the planets and their
satellites by a race, given in species, and of the possible social and
moral redemption of said race by a redeemer, easier of solution?

Of a different order of difficulty. Conscious that the human organism,
normally capable of sustaining an atmospheric pressure of 19 tons,
when elevated to a considerable altitude in the terrestrial atmosphere
suffered with arithmetical progression of intensity, according as
the line of demarcation between troposphere and stratosphere was
approximated from nasal hemorrhage, impeded respiration and vertigo,
when proposing this problem for solution, he had conjectured as a
working hypothesis which could not be proved impossible that a more
adaptable and differently anatomically constructed race of beings might
subsist otherwise under Martian, Mercurial, Veneral, Jovian, Saturnian,
Neptunian or Uranian sufficient and equivalent conditions, though
an apogean humanity of beings created in varying forms with finite
differences resulting similar to the whole and to one another would
probably there as here remain inalterably and inalienably attached to
vanities, to vanities of vanities and to all that is vanity.

     And the problem of possible redemption?
     The minor was proved by the major.


Which various features of the constellations were in turn considered?

The various colours significant of various degrees of vitality (white,
yellow, crimson, vermilion, cinnabar): their degrees of brilliancy:
their magnitudes revealed up to and including the 7th: their positions:
the waggoner's star: Walsingham way: the chariot of David: the annular
cinctures of Saturn: the condensation of spiral nebulae into suns: the
interdependent gyrations of double suns: the independent synchronous
discoveries of Galileo, Simon Marius, Piazzi, Le Verrier, Herschel,
Galle: the systematisations attempted by Bode and Kepler of cubes
of distances and squares of times of revolution: the almost infinite
compressibility of hirsute comets and their vast elliptical egressive
and reentrant orbits from perihelion to aphelion: the sidereal origin of
meteoric stones: the Libyan floods on Mars about the period of the birth
of the younger astroscopist: the annual recurrence of meteoric showers
about the period of the feast of S. Lawrence (martyr, lo August): the
monthly recurrence known as the new moon with the old moon in her arms:
the posited influence of celestial on human bodies: the appearance of a
star (1st magnitude) of exceeding brilliancy dominating by night and
day (a new luminous sun generated by the collision and amalgamation in
incandescence of two nonluminous exsuns) about the period of the
birth of William Shakespeare over delta in the recumbent neversetting
constellation of Cassiopeia and of a star (2nd magnitude) of similar
origin but of lesser brilliancy which had appeared in and disappeared
