thoughts, unchecked by reason, to ramble in the fields of Paradise, and
dared to fancy amiable and lovely creatures sympathizing with my
feelings and cheering my gloom; their angelic countenances breathed
smiles of consolation.  But it was all a dream; no Eve soothed my
sorrows nor shared my thoughts; I was alone.  I remembered Adam's
supplication to his Creator.  But where was mine?  He had abandoned me,
and in the bitterness of my heart I cursed him.

"Autumn passed thus.  I saw, with surprise and grief, the leaves decay
and fall, and nature again assume the barren and bleak appearance it
had worn when I first beheld the woods and the lovely moon.  Yet I did
not heed the bleakness of the weather; I was better fitted by my
conformation for the endurance of cold than heat.  But my chief
delights were the sight of the flowers, the birds, and all the gay
apparel of summer; when those deserted me, I turned with more attention
towards the cottagers.  Their happiness was not decreased by the
absence of summer.  They loved and sympathized with one another; and
their joys, depending on each other, were not interrupted by the
casualties that took place around them.  The more I saw of them, the
greater became my desire to claim their protection and kindness; my
heart yearned to be known and loved by these amiable creatures; to see
their sweet looks directed towards me with affection was the utmost
limit of my ambition.  I dared not think that they would turn them from
me with disdain and horror.  The poor that stopped at their door were
never driven away.  I asked, it is true, for greater treasures than a
little food or rest:  I required kindness and sympathy; but I did not
believe myself utterly unworthy of it.

"The winter advanced, and an entire revolution of the seasons had taken
place since I awoke into life.  My attention at this time was solely
directed towards my plan of introducing myself into the cottage of my
protectors.  I revolved many projects, but that on which I finally
fixed was to enter the dwelling when the blind old man should be alone.
I had sagacity enough to discover that the unnatural hideousness of my
person was the chief object of horror with those who had formerly
beheld me.  My voice, although harsh, had nothing terrible in it; I
thought, therefore, that if in the absence of his children I could gain
the good will and mediation of the old De Lacey, I might by his means
be tolerated by my younger protectors.

"One day, when the sun shone on the red leaves that strewed the ground
and diffused cheerfulness, although it denied warmth, Safie, Agatha,
and Felix departed on a long country walk, and the old man, at his own
desire, was left alone in the cottage.  When his children had departed,
he took up his guitar and played several mournful but sweet airs, more
sweet and mournful than I had ever heard him play before.  At first his
countenance was illuminated with pleasure, but as he continued,
thoughtfulness and sadness succeeded; at length, laying aside the
instrument, he sat absorbed in reflection.

"My heart beat quick; this was the hour and moment of trial, which
would decide my hopes or realize my fears.  The servants were gone to a
neighbouring fair.  All was silent in and around the cottage; it was an
excellent opportunity; yet, when I proceeded to execute my plan, my
limbs failed me and I sank to the ground.  Again I rose, and exerting
all the firmness of which I was master, removed the planks which I had
placed before my hovel to conceal my retreat.  The fresh air revived
me, and with renewed determination I approached the door of their
cottage.

"I knocked.  'Who is there?' said the old man.  'Come in.'

"I entered.  'Pardon this intrusion,' said I; 'I am a traveller in want
of a little rest; you would greatly oblige me if you would allow me to
remain a few minutes before the fire.'

"'Enter,' said De Lacey, 'and I will try in what manner I can to
relieve your wants; but, unfortunately, my children are from home, and
as I am blind, I am afraid I shall find it difficult to procure food
for you.'

"'Do not trouble yourself, my kind host; I have food; it is warmth and
rest only that I need.'

"I sat down, and a silence ensued.  I knew that every minute was
precious to me, yet I remained irresolute in what manner to commence
the interview, when the old man addressed me.  'By your language,
stranger, I suppose you are my countryman; are you French?'

"'No; but I was educated by a French family and understand that
language only.  I am now going to claim the protection of some friends,
whom I sincerely love, and of whose favour I have some hopes.'

"'Are they Germans?'

"'No, they are French.  But let us change the subject.  I am an
unfortunate and deserted creature, I look around and I have no relation
or friend upon earth.  These amiable people to whom I go have never
seen me and know little of me.  I am full of fears, for if I fail
there, I am an outcast in the world forever.'

"'Do not despair.  To be friendless is indeed to be unfortunate, but
the hearts of men, when unprejudiced by any obvious self-interest, are
full of brotherly love and charity.  Rely, therefore, on your hopes;
and if these friends are good and amiable, do not despair.'

"'They are kind--they are the most excellent creatures in the world;
but, unfortunately, they are prejudiced against me.  I have good
dispositions; my life has been hitherto harmless and in some degree
beneficial; but a fatal prejudice clouds their eyes, and where they
ought to see a feeling and kind friend, they behold only a detestable
monster.'

"'That is indeed unfortunate; but if you are really blameless, cannot
you undeceive them?'

"'I am about to undertake that task; and it is on that account that I
feel so many overwhelming terrors.  I tenderly love these friends; I
have, unknown to them, been for many months in the habits of daily
kindness towards them; but they believe that I wish to injure them, and
it is that prejudice which I wish to overcome.'

"'Where do these friends reside?'

"'Near this spot.'

"The old man paused and then continued, 'If you will unreservedly
confide to me the particulars of your tale, I perhaps may be of use in
undeceiving them.  I am blind and cannot judge of your countenance, but
there is something in your words which persuades me that you are
sincere.  I am poor and an exile, but it will afford me true pleasure
to be in any way serviceable to a human creature.'

"'Excellent man!  I thank you and accept your generous offer.  You
raise me from the dust by this kindness; and I trust that, by your aid,
I shall not be driven from the society and sympathy of your fellow
creatures.'

"'Heaven forbid!  Even if you were really criminal, for that can only
drive you to desperation, and not instigate you to virtue.  I also am
unfortunate; I and my family have been condemned, although innocent;
judge, therefore, if I do not feel for your misfortunes.'

"'How can I thank you, my best and only benefactor?  From your lips
first have I heard the voice of kindness directed towards me; I shall
be forever grateful; and your present humanity assures me of success
with those friends whom I am on the point of meeting.'

"'May I know the names and residence of those friends?'

"I paused. This, I thought, was the moment of decision, which was to
rob me of or bestow happiness on me forever.  I struggled vainly for
firmness sufficient to answer him, but the effort destroyed all my
remaining strength; I sank on the chair and sobbed aloud.  At that
moment I heard the steps of my younger protectors.  I had not a moment
to lose, but seizing the hand of the old man, I cried, 'Now is the
time!  Save and protect me!  You and your family are the friends whom I
seek.  Do not you desert me in the hour of trial!'

"'Great God!' exclaimed the old man.  'Who are you?'

"At that instant the cottage door was opened, and Felix, Safie, and
Agatha entered.  Who can describe their horror and consternation on
beholding me?  Agatha fainted, and Safie, unable to attend to her
friend, rushed out of the cottage.  Felix darted forward, and with
supernatural force tore me from his father, to whose knees I clung, in
a transport of fury, he dashed me to the ground and struck me violently
with a stick.  I could have torn him limb from limb, as the lion rends
the antelope.  But my heart sank within me as with bitter sickness, and
I refrained.  I saw him on the point of repeating his blow, when,
overcome by pain and anguish, I quitted the cottage, and in the general
tumult escaped unperceived to my hovel."



Chapter 16

"Cursed, cursed creator!  Why did I live?  Why, in that instant, did I
not extinguish the spark of existence which you had so wantonly
bestowed?  I know not; despair had not yet taken possession of me; my
feelings were those of rage and revenge.  I could with pleasure have
destroyed the cottage and its inhabitants and have glutted myself with
their shrieks and misery.

"When night came I quitted my retreat and wandered in the wood; and
now, no longer restrained by the fear of discovery, I gave vent to my
anguish in fearful howlings.  I was like a wild beast that had broken
the toils, destroying the objects that obstructed me and ranging
through the wood with a stag-like swiftness.  Oh!  What a miserable
night I passed!  The cold stars shone in mockery, and the bare trees
waved their branches above me; now and then the sweet voice of a bird
burst forth amidst the universal stillness.  All, save I, were at rest
or in enjoyment; I, like the arch-fiend, bore a hell within me, and
finding myself unsympathized with, wished to tear up the trees, spread
havoc and destruction around me, and then to have sat down and enjoyed
the ruin.

"But this was a luxury of sensation that could not endure; I became
fatigued with excess of bodily exertion and sank on the damp grass in
the sick impotence of despair.  There was none among the myriads of men
that existed who would pity or assist me; and should I feel kindness
towards my enemies?  No; from that moment I declared everlasting war
against the species, and more than all, against him who had formed me
and sent me forth to this insupportable misery.

"The sun rose; I heard the voices of men and knew that it was
impossible to return to my retreat during that day.  Accordingly I hid
myself in some thick underwood, determining to devote the ensuing hours
to reflection on my situation.

