part, I do not hesitate to say that, notwithstanding all the evidence
produced against her, I believe and rely on her perfect innocence.  She
had no temptation for such an action; as to the bauble on which the
chief proof rests, if she had earnestly desired it, I should have
willingly given it to her, so much do I esteem and value her."

A murmur of approbation followed Elizabeth's simple and powerful
appeal, but it was excited by her generous interference, and not in
favour of poor Justine, on whom the public indignation was turned with
renewed violence, charging her with the blackest ingratitude.  She
herself wept as Elizabeth spoke, but she did not answer.  My own
agitation and anguish was extreme during the whole trial.  I believed
in her innocence; I knew it.  Could the demon who had (I did not for a
minute doubt) murdered my brother also in his hellish sport have
betrayed the innocent to death and ignominy?  I could not sustain the
horror of my situation, and when I perceived that the popular voice and
the countenances of the judges had already condemned my unhappy victim,
I rushed out of the court in agony.  The tortures of the accused did
not equal mine; she was sustained by innocence, but the fangs of
remorse tore my bosom and would not forgo their hold.

I passed a night of unmingled wretchedness.  In the morning I went to
the court; my lips and throat were parched.  I dared not ask the fatal
question, but I was known, and the officer guessed the cause of my
visit.  The ballots had been thrown; they were all black, and Justine
was condemned.

I cannot pretend to describe what I then felt.  I had before
experienced sensations of horror, and I have endeavoured to bestow upon
them adequate expressions, but words cannot convey an idea of the
heart-sickening despair that I then endured.  The person to whom I
addressed myself added that Justine had already confessed her guilt.
"That evidence," he observed, "was hardly required in so glaring a
case, but I am glad of it, and, indeed, none of our judges like to
condemn a criminal upon circumstantial evidence, be it ever so
decisive."

This was strange and unexpected intelligence; what could it mean?  Had
my eyes deceived me?  And was I really as mad as the whole world would
believe me to be if I disclosed the object of my suspicions?  I
hastened to return home, and Elizabeth eagerly demanded the result.

"My cousin," replied I, "it is decided as you may have expected; all
judges had rather that ten innocent should suffer than that one guilty
should escape.  But she has confessed."

This was a dire blow to poor Elizabeth, who had relied with firmness
upon Justine's innocence.  "Alas!" said she.  "How shall I ever again
believe in human goodness?  Justine, whom I loved and esteemed as my
sister, how could she put on those smiles of innocence only to betray?
Her mild eyes seemed incapable of any severity or guile, and yet she
has committed a murder."

Soon after we heard that the poor victim had expressed a desire to see
my cousin.  My father wished her not to go but said that he left it to
her own judgment and feelings to decide.  "Yes," said Elizabeth, "I
will go, although she is guilty; and you, Victor, shall accompany me; I
cannot go alone."  The idea of this visit was torture to me, yet I
could not refuse.  We entered the gloomy prison chamber and beheld
Justine sitting on some straw at the farther end; her hands were
manacled, and her head rested on her knees.  She rose on seeing us
enter, and when we were left alone with her, she threw herself at the
feet of Elizabeth, weeping bitterly.  My cousin wept also.

"Oh, Justine!" said she.  "Why did you rob me of my last consolation?
I relied on your innocence, and although I was then very wretched, I
was not so miserable as I am now."

"And do you also believe that I am so very, very wicked?  Do you also
join with my enemies to crush me, to condemn me as a murderer?" Her
voice was suffocated with sobs.

"Rise, my poor girl," said Elizabeth; "why do you kneel, if you are
innocent?  I am not one of your enemies, I believed you guiltless,
notwithstanding every evidence, until I heard that you had yourself
declared your guilt.  That report, you say, is false; and be assured,
dear Justine, that nothing can shake my confidence in you for a moment,
but your own confession."

"I did confess, but I confessed a lie.  I confessed, that I might
obtain absolution; but now that falsehood lies heavier at my heart than
all my other sins.  The God of heaven forgive me!  Ever since I was
condemned, my confessor has besieged me; he threatened and menaced,
until I almost began to think that I was the monster that he said I
was.  He threatened excommunication and hell fire in my last moments if
I continued obdurate.  Dear lady, I had none to support me; all looked
on me as a wretch doomed to ignominy and perdition.  What could I do?
In an evil hour I subscribed to a lie; and now only am I truly
miserable."

She paused, weeping, and then continued, "I thought with horror, my
sweet lady, that you should believe your Justine, whom your blessed
aunt had so highly honoured, and whom you loved, was a creature capable
of a crime which none but the devil himself could have perpetrated.
Dear William! dearest blessed child!  I soon shall see you again in
heaven, where we shall all be happy; and that consoles me, going as I
am to suffer ignominy and death."

"Oh, Justine!  Forgive me for having for one moment distrusted you.
Why did you confess?  But do not mourn, dear girl.  Do not fear.  I
will proclaim, I will prove your innocence.  I will melt the stony
hearts of your enemies by my tears and prayers.  You shall not die!
You, my playfellow, my companion, my sister, perish on the scaffold!
No!  No!  I never could survive so horrible a misfortune."

Justine shook her head mournfully.  "I do not fear to die," she said;
"that pang is past.  God raises my weakness and gives me courage to
endure the worst.  I leave a sad and bitter world; and if you remember
me and think of me as of one unjustly condemned, I am resigned to the
fate awaiting me.  Learn from me, dear lady, to submit in patience to
the will of heaven!"

During this conversation I had retired to a corner of the prison room,
where I could conceal the horrid anguish that possessed me.  Despair!
Who dared talk of that?  The poor victim, who on the morrow was to pass
the awful boundary between life and death, felt not, as I did, such
deep and bitter agony.  I gnashed my teeth and ground them together,
uttering a groan that came from my inmost soul.  Justine started.  When
she saw who it was, she approached me and said, "Dear sir, you are very
kind to visit me; you, I hope, do not believe that I am guilty?"

I could not answer.  "No, Justine," said Elizabeth; "he is more
convinced of your innocence than I was, for even when he heard that you
had confessed, he did not credit it."

"I truly thank him.  In these last moments I feel the sincerest
gratitude towards those who think of me with kindness.  How sweet is
the affection of others to such a wretch as I am!  It removes more than
half my misfortune, and I feel as if I could die in peace now that my
innocence is acknowledged by you, dear lady, and your cousin."

Thus the poor sufferer tried to comfort others and herself.  She indeed
gained the resignation she desired.  But I, the true murderer, felt the
never-dying worm alive in my bosom, which allowed of no hope or
consolation.  Elizabeth also wept and was unhappy, but hers also was
the misery of innocence, which, like a cloud that passes over the fair
moon, for a while hides but cannot tarnish its brightness.  Anguish and
despair had penetrated into the core of my heart; I bore a hell within
me which nothing could extinguish.  We stayed several hours with
Justine, and it was with great difficulty that Elizabeth could tear
herself away.  "I wish," cried she, "that I were to die with you; I
cannot live in this world of misery."

Justine assumed an air of cheerfulness, while she with difficulty
repressed her bitter tears.  She embraced Elizabeth and said in a voice
of half-suppressed emotion, "Farewell, sweet lady, dearest Elizabeth,
my beloved and only friend; may heaven, in its bounty, bless and
preserve you; may this be the last misfortune that you will ever
suffer!  Live, and be happy, and make others so."

And on the morrow Justine died.  Elizabeth's heart-rending eloquence
failed to move the judges from their settled conviction in the
criminality of the saintly sufferer.  My passionate and indignant
appeals were lost upon them.  And when I received their cold answers
and heard the harsh, unfeeling reasoning of these men, my purposed
avowal died away on my lips.  Thus I might proclaim myself a madman,
but not revoke the sentence passed upon my wretched victim.  She
perished on the scaffold as a murderess!

From the tortures of my own heart, I turned to contemplate the deep and
voiceless grief of my Elizabeth.  This also was my doing!  And my
father's woe, and the desolation of that late so smiling home all was
the work of my thrice-accursed hands!  Ye weep, unhappy ones, but these
are not your last tears!  Again shall you raise the funeral wail, and
the sound of your lamentations shall again and again be heard!
Frankenstein, your son, your kinsman, your early, much-loved friend; he
who would spend each vital drop of blood for your sakes, who has no
thought nor sense of joy except as it is mirrored also in your dear
countenances, who would fill the air with blessings and spend his life
in serving you--he bids you weep, to shed countless tears; happy beyond
his hopes, if thus inexorable fate be satisfied, and if the destruction
pause before the peace of the grave have succeeded to your sad torments!

Thus spoke my prophetic soul, as, torn by remorse, horror, and despair,
I beheld those I loved spend vain sorrow upon the graves of William and
Justine, the first hapless victims to my unhallowed arts.



Chapter 9

Nothing is more painful to the human mind than, after the feelings have
been worked up by a quick succession of events, the dead calmness of
inaction and certainty which follows and deprives the soul both of hope
and fear.  Justine died, she rested, and I was alive.  The blood flowed
freely in my veins, but a weight of despair and remorse pressed on my
heart which nothing could remove.  Sleep fled from my eyes; I wandered
like an evil spirit, for I had committed deeds of mischief beyond
description horrible, and more, much more (I persuaded myself) was yet
behind.  Yet my heart overflowed with kindness and the love of virtue.
I had begun life with benevolent intentions and thirsted for the moment
when I should put them in practice and make myself useful to my fellow
beings.  Now all was blasted; instead of that serenity of conscience
which allowed me to look back upon the past with self-satisfaction, and
from thence to gather promise of new hopes, I was seized by remorse and
the sense of guilt, which hurried me away to a hell of intense tortures
such as no language can describe.

This state of mind preyed upon my health, which had perhaps never
entirely recovered from the first shock it had sustained.  I shunned
