sake, in murder and wretchedness.  He had sworn to quit the
neighbourhood of man and hide himself in deserts, but she had not; and
she, who in all probability was to become a thinking and reasoning
animal, might refuse to comply with a compact made before her creation.
They might even hate each other; the creature who already lived loathed
his own deformity, and might he not conceive a greater abhorrence for
it when it came before his eyes in the female form?  She also might
turn with disgust from him to the superior beauty of man; she might
quit him, and he be again alone, exasperated by the fresh provocation
of being deserted by one of his own species.  Even if they were to
leave Europe and inhabit the deserts of the new world, yet one of the
first results of those sympathies for which the daemon thirsted would
be children, and a race of devils would be propagated upon the earth
who might make the very existence of the species of man a condition
precarious and full of terror.  Had I right, for my own benefit, to
inflict this curse upon everlasting generations?  I had before been
moved by the sophisms of the being I had created; I had been struck
senseless by his fiendish threats; but now, for the first time, the
wickedness of my promise burst upon me; I shuddered to think that
future ages might curse me as their pest, whose selfishness had not
hesitated to buy its own peace at the price, perhaps, of the existence
of the whole human race.

I trembled and my heart failed within me, when, on looking up, I saw by
the light of the moon the daemon at the casement.  A ghastly grin
wrinkled his lips as he gazed on me, where I sat fulfilling the task
which he had allotted to me.  Yes, he had followed me in my travels; he
had loitered in forests, hid himself in caves, or taken refuge in wide
and desert heaths; and he now came to mark my progress and claim the
fulfilment of my promise.

As I looked on him, his countenance expressed the utmost extent of
malice and treachery.  I thought with a sensation of madness on my
promise of creating another like to him, and trembling with passion,
tore to pieces the thing on which I was engaged.  The wretch saw me
destroy the creature on whose future existence he depended for
happiness, and with a howl of devilish despair and revenge, withdrew.

I left the room, and locking the door, made a solemn vow in my own
heart never to resume my labours; and then, with trembling steps, I
sought my own apartment. I was alone; none were near me to dissipate
the gloom and relieve me from the sickening oppression of the most
terrible reveries.

Several hours passed, and I remained near my window gazing on the sea;
it was almost motionless, for the winds were hushed, and all nature
reposed under the eye of the quiet moon.  A few fishing vessels alone
specked the water, and now and then the gentle breeze wafted the sound
of voices as the fishermen called to one another.  I felt the silence,
although I was hardly conscious of its extreme profundity, until my ear
was suddenly arrested by the paddling of oars near the shore, and a
person landed close to my house.

In a few minutes after, I heard the creaking of my door, as if some one
endeavoured to open it softly.  I trembled from head to foot; I felt a
presentiment of who it was and wished to rouse one of the peasants who
dwelt in a cottage not far from mine; but I was overcome by the
sensation of helplessness, so often felt in frightful dreams, when you
in vain endeavour to fly from an impending danger, and was rooted to
the spot. Presently I heard the sound of footsteps along the passage;
the door opened, and the wretch whom I dreaded appeared.

Shutting the door, he approached me and said in a smothered voice, "You
have destroyed the work which you began; what is it that you intend?
Do you dare to break your promise?  I have endured toil and misery; I
left Switzerland with you; I crept along the shores of the Rhine, among
its willow islands and over the summits of its hills.  I have dwelt
many months in the heaths of England and among the deserts of Scotland.
I have endured incalculable fatigue, and cold, and hunger; do you dare
destroy my hopes?"

"Begone!  I do break my promise; never will I create another like
yourself, equal in deformity and wickedness."

"Slave, I before reasoned with you, but you have proved yourself
unworthy of my condescension.  Remember that I have power; you believe
yourself miserable, but I can make you so wretched that the light of
day will be hateful to you.  You are my creator, but I am your master;
obey!"

"The hour of my irresolution is past, and the period of your power is
arrived.  Your threats cannot move me to do an act of wickedness; but
they confirm me in a determination of not creating you a companion in
vice.  Shall I, in cool blood, set loose upon the earth a daemon whose
delight is in death and wretchedness?  Begone!  I am firm, and your
words will only exasperate my rage."

The monster saw my determination in my face and gnashed his teeth in
the impotence of anger.  "Shall each man," cried he, "find a wife for
his bosom, and each beast have his mate, and I be alone?  I had
feelings of affection, and they were requited by detestation and scorn.
Man!  You may hate, but beware!  Your hours will pass in dread and
misery, and soon the bolt  will fall which must ravish from you your
happiness forever.  Are you to be happy while I grovel in the intensity
of my wretchedness?  You can blast my other passions, but revenge
remains--revenge, henceforth dearer than light or food!  I may die, but
first you, my tyrant and tormentor, shall curse the sun that gazes on
your misery.  Beware, for I am fearless and therefore powerful.  I will
watch with the wiliness of a snake, that I may sting with its venom.
Man, you shall repent of the injuries you inflict."

"Devil, cease; and do not poison the air with these sounds of malice.
I have declared my resolution to you, and I am no coward to bend
beneath words.  Leave me; I am inexorable."

"It is well.  I go; but remember, I shall be with you on your
wedding-night."

I started forward and exclaimed, "Villain!  Before you sign my
death-warrant, be sure that you are yourself safe."

I would have seized him, but he eluded me and quitted the house with
precipitation.  In a few moments I saw him in his boat, which shot
across the waters with an arrowy swiftness and was soon lost amidst the
waves.

All was again silent, but his words rang in my ears.  I burned with
rage to pursue the murderer of my peace and precipitate him into the
ocean.  I walked up and down my room hastily and perturbed, while my
imagination conjured up a thousand images to torment and sting me.  Why
had I not followed him and closed with him in mortal strife?  But I had
suffered him to depart, and he had directed his course towards the
mainland.  I shuddered to think who might be the next victim sacrificed
to his insatiate revenge.  And then I thought again of his words--"I
WILL BE WITH YOU ON YOUR WEDDING-NIGHT."  That, then, was the period
fixed for the fulfilment of my destiny.  In that hour I should die and
at once satisfy and extinguish his malice.  The prospect did not move
me to fear; yet when I thought of my beloved Elizabeth, of her tears
and endless sorrow, when she should find her lover so barbarously
snatched from her, tears, the first I had shed for many months,
streamed from my eyes, and I resolved not to fall before my enemy
without a bitter struggle.

The night passed away, and the sun rose from the ocean; my feelings
became calmer, if it may be called calmness when the violence of rage
sinks into the depths of despair.  I left the house, the horrid scene
of the last night's contention, and walked on the beach of the sea,
which I almost regarded as an insuperable barrier between me and my
fellow creatures; nay, a wish that such should prove the fact stole
across me.

I desired that I might pass my life on that barren rock, wearily, it is
true, but uninterrupted by any sudden shock of misery.  If I returned,
it was to be sacrificed or to see those whom I most loved die under the
grasp of a daemon whom I had myself created.

I walked about the isle like a restless spectre, separated from all it
loved and miserable in the separation.  When it became noon, and the
sun rose higher, I lay down on the grass and was overpowered by a deep
sleep.  I had been awake the whole of the preceding night, my nerves
were agitated, and my eyes inflamed by watching and misery.  The sleep
into which I now sank refreshed me; and when I awoke, I again felt as
if I belonged to a race of human beings like myself, and I began to
reflect upon what had passed with greater composure; yet still the
words of the fiend rang in my ears like a death-knell; they appeared
like a dream, yet distinct and oppressive as a reality.

The sun had far descended, and I still sat on the shore, satisfying my
appetite, which had become ravenous, with an oaten cake, when I saw a
fishing-boat land close to me, and one of the men brought me a packet;
it contained letters from Geneva, and one from Clerval entreating me to
join him.  He said that he was wearing away his time fruitlessly where
he was, that letters from the friends he had formed in London desired
his return to complete the negotiation they had entered into for his
Indian enterprise.  He could not any longer delay his departure; but as
his journey to London might be followed, even sooner than he now
conjectured, by his longer voyage, he entreated me to bestow as much of
my society on him as I could spare.  He besought me, therefore, to
leave my solitary isle and to meet him at Perth, that we might proceed
southwards together.  This letter in a degree recalled me to life, and
I determined to quit my island at the expiration of two days.  Yet,
before I departed, there was a task to perform, on which I shuddered to
reflect; I must pack up my chemical instruments, and for that purpose I
must enter the room which had been the scene of my odious work, and I
must handle those utensils the sight of which was sickening to me. The
next morning, at daybreak, I summoned sufficient courage and unlocked
the door of my laboratory.  The remains of the half-finished creature,
whom I had destroyed, lay scattered on the floor, and I almost felt as
if I had mangled the living flesh of a human being.  I paused to
collect myself and then entered the chamber.  With trembling hand I
conveyed the instruments out of the room, but I reflected that I ought
not to leave the relics of my work to excite the horror and suspicion
of the peasants; and I accordingly put them into a basket, with a great
quantity of stones, and laying them up, determined to throw them into
the sea that very night; and in the meantime I sat upon the beach,
employed in cleaning and arranging my chemical apparatus.

Nothing could be more complete than the alteration that had taken place
in my feelings since the night of the appearance of the daemon.  I had
before regarded my promise with a gloomy despair as a thing that, with
whatever consequences, must be fulfilled; but I now felt as if a film
had been taken from before my eyes and that I for the first time saw
clearly.  The idea of renewing my labours did not for one instant occur
to me; the threat I had heard weighed on my thoughts, but I did not
reflect that a voluntary act of mine could avert it.  I had resolved in
my own mind that to create another like the fiend I had first made
would be an act of the basest and most atrocious selfishness, and I
banished from my mind every thought that could lead to a different
conclusion.

