for me to be forced to speak the truth.  It is the first time in my life
that I have ever been reduced to such a painful position, and I am really
quite inexperienced in doing anything of the kind.  However, I will tell
you quite frankly that I have no brother Ernest.  I have no brother at
all.  I never had a brother in my life, and I certainly have not the
smallest intention of ever having one in the future.

Cecily.  [Surprised.]  No brother at all?

Jack.  [Cheerily.]  None!

Gwendolen.  [Severely.]  Had you never a brother of any kind?

Jack.  [Pleasantly.]  Never.  Not even of any kind.

Gwendolen.  I am afraid it is quite clear, Cecily, that neither of us is
engaged to be married to any one.

Cecily.  It is not a very pleasant position for a young girl suddenly to
find herself in.  Is it?

Gwendolen.  Let us go into the house.  They will hardly venture to come
after us there.

Cecily.  No, men are so cowardly, aren't they?

[They retire into the house with scornful looks.]

Jack.  This ghastly state of things is what you call Bunburying, I
suppose?

Algernon.  Yes, and a perfectly wonderful Bunbury it is.  The most
wonderful Bunbury I have ever had in my life.

Jack.  Well, you've no right whatsoever to Bunbury here.

Algernon.  That is absurd.  One has a right to Bunbury anywhere one
chooses.  Every serious Bunburyist knows that.

Jack.  Serious Bunburyist!  Good heavens!

Algernon.  Well, one must be serious about something, if one wants to
have any amusement in life.  I happen to be serious about Bunburying.
What on earth you are serious about I haven't got the remotest idea.
About everything, I should fancy.  You have such an absolutely trivial
nature.

Jack.  Well, the only small satisfaction I have in the whole of this
wretched business is that your friend Bunbury is quite exploded.  You
won't be able to run down to the country quite so often as you used to
do, dear Algy.  And a very good thing too.

Algernon.  Your brother is a little off colour, isn't he, dear Jack?  You
won't be able to disappear to London quite so frequently as your wicked
custom was.  And not a bad thing either.

Jack.  As for your conduct towards Miss Cardew, I must say that your
taking in a sweet, simple, innocent girl like that is quite inexcusable.
To say nothing of the fact that she is my ward.

Algernon.  I can see no possible defence at all for your deceiving a
brilliant, clever, thoroughly experienced young lady like Miss Fairfax.
To say nothing of the fact that she is my cousin.

Jack.  I wanted to be engaged to Gwendolen, that is all.  I love her.

Algernon.  Well, I simply wanted to be engaged to Cecily.  I adore her.

Jack.  There is certainly no chance of your marrying Miss Cardew.

Algernon.  I don't think there is much likelihood, Jack, of you and Miss
Fairfax being united.

Jack.  Well, that is no business of yours.

Algernon.  If it was my business, I wouldn't talk about it.  [Begins to
eat muffins.]  It is very vulgar to talk about one's business.  Only
people like stock-brokers do that, and then merely at dinner parties.

Jack.  How can you sit there, calmly eating muffins when we are in this
horrible trouble, I can't make out.  You seem to me to be perfectly
heartless.

Algernon.  Well, I can't eat muffins in an agitated manner.  The butter
would probably get on my cuffs.  One should always eat muffins quite
calmly.  It is the only way to eat them.

Jack.  I say it's perfectly heartless your eating muffins at all, under
the circumstances.

Algernon.  When I am in trouble, eating is the only thing that consoles
me.  Indeed, when I am in really great trouble, as any one who knows me
intimately will tell you, I refuse everything except food and drink.  At
the present moment I am eating muffins because I am unhappy.  Besides, I
am particularly fond of muffins.  [Rising.]

Jack.  [Rising.]  Well, that is no reason why you should eat them all in
that greedy way. [Takes muffins from Algernon.]

Algernon.  [Offering tea-cake.]  I wish you would have tea-cake instead.
I don't like tea-cake.

Jack.  Good heavens!  I suppose a man may eat his own muffins in his own
garden.

Algernon.  But you have just said it was perfectly heartless to eat
muffins.

Jack.  I said it was perfectly heartless of you, under the circumstances.
That is a very different thing.

Algernon.  That may be.  But the muffins are the same.  [He seizes the
muffin-dish from Jack.]

Jack.  Algy, I wish to goodness you would go.

Algernon.  You can't possibly ask me to go without having some dinner.
It's absurd.  I never go without my dinner.  No one ever does, except
vegetarians and people like that.  Besides I have just made arrangements
with Dr. Chasuble to be christened at a quarter to six under the name of
Ernest.

Jack.  My dear fellow, the sooner you give up that nonsense the better.  I
made arrangements this morning with Dr. Chasuble to be christened myself
at 5.30, and I naturally will take the name of Ernest.  Gwendolen would
wish it.  We can't both be christened Ernest.  It's absurd.  Besides, I
have a perfect right to be christened if I like.  There is no evidence at
all that I have ever been christened by anybody.  I should think it
extremely probable I never was, and so does Dr. Chasuble.  It is entirely
different in your case.  You have been christened already.

Algernon.  Yes, but I have not been christened for years.

Jack.  Yes, but you have been christened.  That is the important thing.

Algernon.  Quite so.  So I know my constitution can stand it.  If you are
not quite sure about your ever having been christened, I must say I think
it rather dangerous your venturing on it now.  It might make you very
unwell.  You can hardly have forgotten that some one very closely
connected with you was very nearly carried off this week in Paris by a
severe chill.

Jack.  Yes, but you said yourself that a severe chill was not hereditary.

Algernon.  It usen't to be, I know--but I daresay it is now.  Science is
always making wonderful improvements in things.

Jack.  [Picking up the muffin-dish.]  Oh, that is nonsense; you are
always talking nonsense.

Algernon.  Jack, you are at the muffins again!  I wish you wouldn't.
There are only two left.  [Takes them.]  I told you I was particularly
fond of muffins.

Jack.  But I hate tea-cake.

Algernon.  Why on earth then do you allow tea-cake to be served up for
your guests?  What ideas you have of hospitality!

Jack.  Algernon!  I have already told you to go.  I don't want you here.
Why don't you go!

Algernon.  I haven't quite finished my tea yet! and there is still one
muffin left.  [Jack groans, and sinks into a chair.  Algernon still
continues eating.]

ACT DROP




THIRD ACT


SCENE


Morning-room at the Manor House.

[Gwendolen and Cecily are at the window, looking out into the garden.]

Gwendolen.  The fact that they did not follow us at once into the house,
as any one else would have done, seems to me to show that they have some
sense of shame left.

Cecily.  They have been eating muffins.  That looks like repentance.

Gwendolen.  [After a pause.]  They don't seem to notice us at all.
Couldn't you cough?

Cecily.  But I haven't got a cough.

Gwendolen.  They're looking at us.  What effrontery!

Cecily.  They're approaching.  That's very forward of them.

Gwendolen.  Let us preserve a dignified silence.

Cecily.  Certainly.  It's the only thing to do now.  [Enter Jack followed
by Algernon.  They whistle some dreadful popular air from a British
