
He made a sufficiently poor job of it; and to his surprise too, for the
cleaning of wooden spoons and trenchers had seemed an easy thing to do.
It was a tedious and troublesome piece of work, but he finished it
at last.  He was becoming impatient to get away on his journey now;
however, he was not to lose this thrifty dame's society so easily.  She
furnished him some little odds and ends of employment, which he got
through with after a fair fashion and with some credit.  Then she set
him and the little girls to paring some winter apples; but he was so
awkward at this service that she retired him from it and gave him a
butcher knife to grind.

Afterwards she kept him carding wool until he began to think he had laid
the good King Alfred about far enough in the shade for the present in
the matter of showy menial heroisms that would read picturesquely in
story-books and histories, and so he was half-minded to resign.  And
when, just after the noonday dinner, the goodwife gave him a basket
of kittens to drown, he did resign.  At least he was just going to
resign--for he felt that he must draw the line somewhere, and it
seemed to him that to draw it at kitten-drowning was about the right
thing--when there was an interruption.  The interruption was John
Canty--with a peddler's pack on his back--and Hugo.

The King discovered these rascals approaching the front gate before they
had had a chance to see him; so he said nothing about drawing the line,
but took up his basket of kittens and stepped quietly out the back way,
without a word.  He left the creatures in an out-house, and hurried on,
into a narrow lane at the rear.




CHAPTER XX. The Prince and the hermit.

The high hedge hid him from the house, now; and so, under the impulse of
a deadly fright, he let out all his forces and sped toward a wood in the
distance.  He never looked back until he had almost gained the shelter
of the forest; then he turned and descried two figures in the distance.
That was sufficient; he did not wait to scan them critically, but
hurried on, and never abated his pace till he was far within the
twilight depths of the wood. Then he stopped; being persuaded that he
was now tolerably safe. He listened intently, but the stillness was
profound and solemn--awful, even, and depressing to the spirits.  At
wide intervals his straining ear did detect sounds, but they were so
remote, and hollow, and mysterious, that they seemed not to be real
sounds, but only the moaning and complaining ghosts of departed
ones.  So the sounds were yet more dreary than the silence which they
interrupted.

It was his purpose, in the beginning, to stay where he was the rest of
the day; but a chill soon invaded his perspiring body, and he was at
last obliged to resume movement in order to get warm. He struck straight
through the forest, hoping to pierce to a road presently, but he was
disappointed in this.  He travelled on and on; but the farther he went,
the denser the wood became, apparently.  The gloom began to thicken,
by-and-by, and the King realised that the night was coming on.  It made
him shudder to think of spending it in such an uncanny place; so he
tried to hurry faster, but he only made the less speed, for he could
not now see well enough to choose his steps judiciously; consequently he
kept tripping over roots and tangling himself in vines and briers.

And how glad he was when at last he caught the glimmer of a light! He
approached it warily, stopping often to look about him and listen.  It
came from an unglazed window-opening in a shabby little hut.  He heard
a voice, now, and felt a disposition to run and hide; but he changed his
mind at once, for this voice was praying, evidently.  He glided to the
one window of the hut, raised himself on tiptoe, and stole a glance
within.  The room was small; its floor was the natural earth, beaten
hard by use; in a corner was a bed of rushes and a ragged blanket or
two; near it was a pail, a cup, a basin, and two or three pots and pans;
there was a short bench and a three-legged stool; on the hearth the
remains of a faggot fire were smouldering; before a shrine, which was
lighted by a single candle, knelt an aged man, and on an old wooden box
at his side lay an open book and a human skull.  The man was of large,
bony frame; his hair and whiskers were very long and snowy white; he
was clothed in a robe of sheepskins which reached from his neck to his
heels.

"A holy hermit!" said the King to himself; "now am I indeed fortunate."

The hermit rose from his knees; the King knocked.  A deep voice
responded--

"Enter!--but leave sin behind, for the ground whereon thou shalt stand
is holy!"

The King entered, and paused.  The hermit turned a pair of gleaming,
unrestful eyes upon him, and said--

"Who art thou?"

"I am the King," came the answer, with placid simplicity.

"Welcome, King!" cried the hermit, with enthusiasm.  Then, bustling
about with feverish activity, and constantly saying, "Welcome, welcome,"
he arranged his bench, seated the King on it, by the hearth, threw some
faggots on the fire, and finally fell to pacing the floor with a nervous
stride.

"Welcome!  Many have sought sanctuary here, but they were not worthy,
and were turned away.  But a King who casts his crown away, and despises
the vain splendours of his office, and clothes his body in rags, to
devote his life to holiness and the mortification of the flesh--he is
worthy, he is welcome!--here shall he abide all his days till death
come."  The King hastened to interrupt and explain, but the hermit paid
no attention to him--did not even hear him, apparently, but went right
on with his talk, with a raised voice and a growing energy.  "And thou
shalt be at peace here.  None shall find out thy refuge to disquiet thee
with supplications to return to that empty and foolish life which God
hath moved thee to abandon.  Thou shalt pray here; thou shalt study the
Book; thou shalt meditate upon the follies and delusions of this world,
and upon the sublimities of the world to come; thou shalt feed upon
crusts and herbs, and scourge thy body with whips, daily, to the
purifying of thy soul. Thou shalt wear a hair shirt next thy skin;
thou shalt drink water only; and thou shalt be at peace; yes, wholly at
peace; for whoso comes to seek thee shall go his way again, baffled; he
shall not find thee, he shall not molest thee."

The old man, still pacing back and forth, ceased to speak aloud, and
began to mutter.  The King seized this opportunity to state his case;
and he did it with an eloquence inspired by uneasiness and apprehension.
 But the hermit went on muttering, and gave no heed.  And still
muttering, he approached the King and said impressively--

"'Sh!  I will tell you a secret!"  He bent down to impart it, but
checked himself, and assumed a listening attitude.  After a moment
or two he went on tiptoe to the window-opening, put his head out, and
peered around in the gloaming, then came tiptoeing back again, put his
face close down to the King's, and whispered--

"I am an archangel!"

The King started violently, and said to himself, "Would God I were with
the outlaws again; for lo, now am I the prisoner of a madman!"  His
apprehensions were heightened, and they showed plainly in his face.  In
a low excited voice the hermit continued--

"I see you feel my atmosphere!  There's awe in your face!  None may
be in this atmosphere and not be thus affected; for it is the very
atmosphere of heaven.  I go thither and return, in the twinkling of an
eye.  I was made an archangel on this very spot, it is five years ago,
by angels sent from heaven to confer that awful dignity.  Their presence
filled this place with an intolerable brightness.  And they knelt to me,
King! yes, they knelt to me! for I was greater than they.  I have walked
in the courts of heaven, and held speech with the patriarchs.  Touch
my hand--be not afraid--touch it.  There--now thou hast touched a hand
which has been clasped by Abraham and Isaac and Jacob!  For I have
walked in the golden courts; I have seen the Deity face to face!"  He
paused, to give this speech effect; then his face suddenly changed, and
he started to his feet again saying, with angry energy, "Yes, I am an
archangel; _a mere archangel!_--I that might have been pope!  It is
verily true.  I was told it from heaven in a dream, twenty years ago;
ah, yes, I was to be pope!--and I _should_ have been pope, for Heaven
had said it--but the King dissolved my religious house, and I, poor
obscure unfriended monk, was cast homeless upon the world, robbed of my
mighty destiny!" Here he began to mumble again, and beat his forehead in
futile rage, with his fist; now and then articulating a venomous curse,
and now and then a pathetic "Wherefore I am nought but an archangel--I
that should have been pope!"

So he went on, for an hour, whilst the poor little King sat and
suffered. Then all at once the old man's frenzy departed, and he became
all gentleness.  His voice softened, he came down out of his clouds, and
fell to prattling along so simply and so humanly, that he soon won the
King's heart completely.  The old devotee moved the boy nearer to the
fire and made him comfortable; doctored his small bruises and abrasions
with a deft and tender hand; and then set about preparing and cooking a
supper--chatting pleasantly all the time, and occasionally stroking the
lad's cheek or patting his head, in such a gently caressing way that in
a little while all the fear and repulsion inspired by the archangel were
changed to reverence and affection for the man.

This happy state of things continued while the two ate the supper; then,
after a prayer before the shrine, the hermit put the boy to bed, in a
small adjoining room, tucking him in as snugly and lovingly as a mother
might; and so, with a parting caress, left him and sat down by the
fire, and began to poke the brands about in an absent and aimless way.
Presently he paused; then tapped his forehead several times with his
fingers, as if trying to recall some thought which had escaped from his
mind.  Apparently he was unsuccessful.  Now he started quickly up, and
entered his guest's room, and said--

"Thou art King?"

"Yes," was the response, drowsily uttered.

"What King?"

"Of England."

"Of England?  Then Henry is gone!"

"Alack, it is so.  I am his son."

A black frown settled down upon the hermit's face, and he clenched his
bony hands with a vindictive energy.  He stood a few moments, breathing
fast and swallowing repeatedly, then said in a husky voice--

"Dost know it was he that turned us out into the world houseless and
homeless?"
