
"Where is he?"

A mocking laugh was his answer.  The King was in a rage in a moment; he
seized a billet of wood and was in the act of charging upon the youth
when another mocking laugh fell upon his ear.  It was from the lame
ruffian who had been following at a distance. The King turned and said
angrily--

"Who art thou?  What is thy business here?"

"Leave thy foolery," said the man, "and quiet thyself.  My disguise is
none so good that thou canst pretend thou knowest not thy father through
it."

"Thou art not my father.  I know thee not.  I am the King.  If thou hast
hid my servant, find him for me, or thou shalt sup sorrow for what thou
hast done."

John Canty replied, in a stern and measured voice--

"It is plain thou art mad, and I am loath to punish thee;  but if thou
provoke me, I must.  Thy prating doth no harm here, where there are
no ears that need to mind thy follies; yet it is well to practise thy
tongue to wary speech, that it may do no hurt when our quarters change.
 I have done a murder, and may not tarry at home--neither shalt thou,
seeing I need thy service.  My name is changed, for wise reasons; it is
Hobbs--John Hobbs; thine is Jack--charge thy memory accordingly.  Now,
then, speak.  Where is thy mother?  Where are thy sisters?  They came
not to the place appointed--knowest thou whither they went?"

The King answered sullenly--

"Trouble me not with these riddles.  My mother is dead; my sisters are
in the palace."

The youth near by burst into a derisive laugh, and the King would have
assaulted him, but Canty--or Hobbs, as he now called himself--prevented
him, and said--

"Peace, Hugo, vex him not; his mind is astray, and thy ways fret him.
Sit thee down, Jack, and quiet thyself; thou shalt have a morsel to eat,
anon."

Hobbs and Hugo fell to talking together, in low voices, and the King
removed himself as far as he could from their disagreeable company.
 He withdrew into the twilight of the farther end of the barn, where
he found the earthen floor bedded a foot deep with straw.  He lay down
here, drew straw over himself in lieu of blankets, and was soon absorbed
in thinking.  He had many griefs, but the minor ones were swept almost
into forgetfulness by the supreme one, the loss of his father.  To
the rest of the world the name of Henry VIII. brought a shiver, and
suggested an ogre whose nostrils breathed destruction and whose hand
dealt scourgings and death; but to this boy the name brought only
sensations of pleasure; the figure it invoked wore a countenance that
was all gentleness and affection.  He called to mind a long succession
of loving passages between his father and himself, and dwelt fondly upon
them, his unstinted tears attesting how deep and real was the grief that
possessed his heart. As the afternoon wasted away, the lad, wearied with
his troubles, sank gradually into a tranquil and healing slumber.

After a considerable time--he could not tell how long--his senses
struggled to a half-consciousness, and as he lay with closed eyes
vaguely wondering where he was and what had been happening, he noted a
murmurous sound, the sullen beating of rain upon the roof. A snug sense
of comfort stole over him, which was rudely broken, the next moment,
by a chorus of piping cackles and coarse laughter.  It startled him
disagreeably, and he unmuffled his head to see whence this interruption
proceeded.  A grim and unsightly picture met his eye.  A bright fire was
burning in the middle of the floor, at the other end of the barn; and
around it, and lit weirdly up by the red glare, lolled and sprawled the
motliest company of tattered gutter-scum and ruffians, of both sexes, he
had ever read or dreamed of.  There were huge stalwart men, brown
with exposure, long-haired, and clothed in fantastic rags; there were
middle-sized youths, of truculent countenance, and similarly clad; there
were blind mendicants, with patched or bandaged eyes; crippled ones,
with wooden legs and crutches; diseased ones, with running sores peeping
from ineffectual wrappings; there was a villain-looking pedlar with
his pack; a knife-grinder, a tinker, and a barber-surgeon, with the
implements of their trades; some of the females were hardly-grown girls,
some were at prime, some were old and wrinkled hags, and all were loud,
brazen, foul-mouthed; and all soiled and slatternly; there were three
sore-faced babies; there were a couple of starveling curs, with strings
about their necks, whose office was to lead the blind.

The night was come, the gang had just finished feasting, an orgy was
beginning; the can of liquor was passing from mouth to mouth. A general
cry broke forth--

"A song! a song from the Bat and Dick and Dot-and-go-One!"

One of the blind men got up, and made ready by casting aside the patches
that sheltered his excellent eyes, and the pathetic placard which
recited the cause of his calamity.  Dot-and-go-One disencumbered himself
of his timber leg and took his place, upon sound and healthy limbs,
beside his fellow-rascal; then they roared out a rollicking ditty,
and were reinforced by the whole crew, at the end of each stanza, in
a rousing chorus.  By the time the last stanza was reached, the
half-drunken enthusiasm had risen to such a pitch, that everybody joined
in and sang it clear through from the beginning, producing a volume of
villainous sound that made the rafters quake.  These were the inspiring
words:--

'Bien Darkman's then, Bouse Mort and Ken, The bien Coves bings awast, On
Chates to trine by Rome Coves dine For his long lib at last. Bing'd out
bien Morts and toure, and toure, Bing out of the Rome vile bine, And
toure the Cove that cloy'd your duds, Upon the Chates to trine.'

(From'The English Rogue.' London, 1665.)

Conversation followed; not in the thieves' dialect of the song, for that
was only used in talk when unfriendly ears might be listening.  In the
course of it, it appeared that 'John Hobbs' was not altogether a new
recruit, but had trained in the gang at some former time.  His later
history was called for, and when he said he had 'accidentally' killed a
man, considerable satisfaction was expressed; when he added that the
man was a priest, he was roundly applauded, and had to take a drink with
everybody.  Old acquaintances welcomed him joyously, and new ones were
proud to shake him by the hand.  He was asked why he had 'tarried away
so many months.'  He answered--

"London is better than the country, and safer, these late years, the
laws be so bitter and so diligently enforced.  An' I had not had that
accident, I had stayed there.  I had resolved to stay, and never more
venture country-wards--but the accident has ended that."

He inquired how many persons the gang numbered now.  The 'ruffler,' or
chief, answered--

"Five and twenty sturdy budges, bulks, files, clapperdogeons and
maunders, counting the dells and doxies and other morts. {7}  Most are
here, the rest are wandering eastward, along the winter lay. We follow
at dawn."

"I do not see the Wen among the honest folk about me.  Where may he be?"

"Poor lad, his diet is brimstone, now, and over hot for a delicate
taste. He was killed in a brawl, somewhere about midsummer."

"I sorrow to hear that; the Wen was a capable man, and brave."

"That was he, truly.  Black Bess, his dell, is of us yet, but absent on
the eastward tramp; a fine lass, of nice ways and orderly conduct, none
ever seeing her drunk above four days in the seven."

"She was ever strict--I remember it well--a goodly wench and worthy
all commendation.  Her mother was more free and less particular; a
troublesome and ugly-tempered beldame, but furnished with a wit above
the common."

"We lost her through it.  Her gift of palmistry and other sorts of
fortune-telling begot for her at last a witch's name and fame. The
law roasted her to death at a slow fire.  It did touch me to a sort of
tenderness to see the gallant way she met her lot--cursing and reviling
all the crowd that gaped and gazed around her, whilst the flames licked
upward toward her face and catched her thin locks and crackled about
her old gray head--cursing them! why an' thou should'st live a thousand
years thoud'st never hear so masterful a cursing.  Alack, her art died
with her.  There be base and weakling imitations left, but no true
blasphemy."

The Ruffler sighed; the listeners sighed in sympathy; a general
depression fell upon the company for a moment, for even hardened
outcasts like these are not wholly dead to sentiment, but are able to
feel a fleeting sense of loss and affliction at wide intervals and
under peculiarly favouring circumstances--as in cases like to this, for
instance, when genius and culture depart and leave no heir.  However, a
deep drink all round soon restored the spirits of the mourners.

"Have any others of our friends fared hardly?" asked Hobbs.

"Some--yes.  Particularly new comers--such as small husbandmen turned
shiftless and hungry upon the world because their farms were taken from
them to be changed to sheep ranges.  They begged, and were whipped at
the cart's tail, naked from the girdle up, till the blood ran; then set
in the stocks to be pelted; they begged again, were whipped again, and
deprived of an ear; they begged a third time--poor devils, what else
could they do?--and were branded on the cheek with a red-hot iron, then
sold for slaves; they ran away, were hunted down, and hanged.  'Tis
a brief tale, and quickly told.  Others of us have fared less hardly.
Stand forth, Yokel, Burns, and Hodge--show your adornments!"

These stood up and stripped away some of their rags, exposing their
backs, criss-crossed with ropy old welts left by the lash; one turned
up his hair and showed the place where a left ear had once been; another
showed a brand upon his shoulder--the letter V--and a mutilated ear; the
third said--

"I am Yokel, once a farmer and prosperous, with loving wife and
kids--now am I somewhat different in estate and calling; and the wife
and kids are gone; mayhap they are in heaven, mayhap in--in the other
place--but the kindly God be thanked, they bide no more in _England_!
 My good old blameless mother strove to earn bread by nursing the sick;
one of these died, the doctors knew not how, so my mother was burnt for
a witch, whilst my babes looked on and wailed.  English law!--up,
all, with your cups!--now all together and with a cheer!--drink to the
merciful English law that delivered _her_ from the English hell!  Thank
you, mates, one and all.  I begged, from house to house--I and the
wife--bearing with us the hungry kids--but it was crime to be hungry in
England--so they stripped us and lashed us through three towns.  Drink
