a general, though unexpressed, desire to get out of the place--all of
which was lost upon Tom, who was dead to everything but the proposed
cataclysm.  Seeing a puzzled and astonished look in the woman's face, he
added, excitedly--

"Never fear--thou shalt be blameless.  More--thou shalt go free--none
shall touch thee.  Exert thy power."

"Oh, my lord the King, I have it not--I have been falsely accused."

"Thy fears stay thee.  Be of good heart, thou shalt suffer no harm.
 Make a storm--it mattereth not how small a one--I require nought great
or harmful, but indeed prefer the opposite--do this and thy life is
spared--thou shalt go out free, with thy child, bearing the King's
pardon, and safe from hurt or malice from any in the realm."

The woman prostrated herself, and protested, with tears, that she had
no power to do the miracle, else she would gladly win her child's life
alone, and be content to lose her own, if by obedience to the King's
command so precious a grace might be acquired.

Tom urged--the woman still adhered to her declarations.  Finally he
said--

"I think the woman hath said true.  An' _my_ mother were in her place
and gifted with the devil's functions, she had not stayed a moment to
call her storms and lay the whole land in ruins, if the saving of my
forfeit life were the price she got!  It is argument that other
mothers are made in like mould.  Thou art free, goodwife--thou and thy
child--for I do think thee innocent.  _Now_ thou'st nought to fear,
being pardoned--pull off thy stockings!--an' thou canst make me a storm,
thou shalt be rich!"

The redeemed creature was loud in her gratitude, and proceeded to
obey, whilst Tom looked on with eager expectancy, a little marred
by apprehension; the courtiers at the same time manifesting decided
discomfort and uneasiness.  The woman stripped her own feet and her
little girl's also, and plainly did her best to reward the King's
generosity with an earthquake, but it was all a failure and a
disappointment.  Tom sighed, and said--

"There, good soul, trouble thyself no further, thy power is departed
out of thee.  Go thy way in peace; and if it return to thee at any time,
forget me not, but fetch me a storm." {13}




CHAPTER XVI. The State Dinner.

The dinner hour drew near--yet strangely enough, the thought brought
but slight discomfort to Tom, and hardly any terror.  The morning's
experiences had wonderfully built up his confidence; the poor little
ash-cat was already more wonted to his strange garret, after four
days' habit, than a mature person could have become in a full month.  A
child's facility in accommodating itself to circumstances was never more
strikingly illustrated.

Let us privileged ones hurry to the great banqueting-room and have a
glance at matters there whilst Tom is being made ready for the
imposing occasion.  It is a spacious apartment, with gilded pillars
and pilasters, and pictured walls and ceilings.  At the door stand tall
guards, as rigid as statues, dressed in rich and picturesque costumes,
and bearing halberds.  In a high gallery which runs all around the place
is a band of musicians and a packed company of citizens of both sexes,
in brilliant attire.  In the centre of the room, upon a raised platform,
is Tom's table. Now let the ancient chronicler speak:

"A gentleman enters the room bearing a rod, and along with him another
bearing a tablecloth, which, after they have both kneeled three times
with the utmost veneration, he spreads upon the table, and after
kneeling again they both retire; then come two others, one with the rod
again, the other with a salt-cellar, a plate, and bread; when they have
kneeled as the others had done, and placed what was brought upon the
table, they too retire with the same ceremonies performed by the first;
at last come two nobles, richly clothed, one bearing a tasting-knife,
who, after prostrating themselves three times in the most graceful
manner, approach and rub the table with bread and salt, with as much awe
as if the King had been present." {6}

So end the solemn preliminaries.  Now, far down the echoing corridors
we hear a bugle-blast, and the indistinct cry, "Place for the King!
 Way for the King's most excellent majesty!"  These sounds are momently
repeated--they grow nearer and nearer--and presently, almost in our
faces, the martial note peals and the cry rings out, "Way for the King!"
 At this instant the shining pageant appears, and files in at the door,
with a measured march. Let the chronicler speak again:--

"First come Gentlemen, Barons, Earls, Knights of the Garter, all richly
dressed and bareheaded; next comes the Chancellor, between two, one of
which carries the royal sceptre, the other the Sword of State in a red
scabbard, studded with golden fleurs-de-lis, the point upwards; next
comes the King himself--whom, upon his appearing, twelve trumpets and
many drums salute with a great burst of welcome, whilst all in the
galleries rise in their places, crying 'God save the King!'  After him
come nobles attached to his person, and on his right and left march his
guard of honour, his fifty Gentlemen Pensioners, with gilt battle-axes."

This was all fine and pleasant.  Tom's pulse beat high, and a glad light
was in his eye.  He bore himself right gracefully, and all the more
so because he was not thinking of how he was doing it, his mind being
charmed and occupied with the blithe sights and sounds about him--and
besides, nobody can be very ungraceful in nicely-fitting beautiful
clothes after he has grown a little used to them--especially if he is
for the moment unconscious of them. Tom remembered his instructions, and
acknowledged his greeting with a slight inclination of his plumed head,
and a courteous "I thank ye, my good people."

He seated himself at table, without removing his cap; and did it without
the least embarrassment; for to eat with one's cap on was the one
solitary royal custom upon which the kings and the Cantys met upon
common ground, neither party having any advantage over the other in the
matter of old familiarity with it.  The pageant broke up and grouped
itself picturesquely, and remained bareheaded.

Now to the sound of gay music the Yeomen of the Guard entered,--"the
tallest and mightiest men in England, they being carefully selected in
this regard"--but we will let the chronicler tell about it:--

"The Yeomen of the Guard entered, bareheaded, clothed in scarlet, with
golden roses upon their backs; and these went and came, bringing in each
turn a course of dishes, served in plate.  These dishes were received
by a gentleman in the same order they were brought, and placed upon
the table, while the taster gave to each guard a mouthful to eat of the
particular dish he had brought, for fear of any poison."

Tom made a good dinner, notwithstanding he was conscious that hundreds
of eyes followed each morsel to his mouth and watched him eat it with an
interest which could not have been more intense if it had been a deadly
explosive and was expected to blow him up and scatter him all about
the place.  He was careful not to hurry, and equally careful not to do
anything whatever for himself, but wait till the proper official knelt
down and did it for him.  He got through without a mistake--flawless and
precious triumph.

When the meal was over at last and he marched away in the midst of his
bright pageant, with the happy noises in his ears of blaring bugles,
rolling drums, and thundering acclamations, he felt that if he had seen
the worst of dining in public it was an ordeal which he would be glad
to endure several times a day if by that means he could but buy himself
free from some of the more formidable requirements of his royal office.




CHAPTER XVII. Foo-foo the First.

Miles Hendon hurried along toward the Southwark end of the bridge,
keeping a sharp look-out for the persons he sought, and hoping and
expecting to overtake them presently.  He was disappointed in this,
however.  By asking questions, he was enabled to track them part of the
way through Southwark; then all traces ceased, and he was perplexed as
to how to proceed.  Still, he continued his efforts as best he
could during the rest of the day.  Nightfall found him leg-weary,
half-famished, and his desire as far from accomplishment as ever; so
he supped at the Tabard Inn and went to bed, resolved to make an early
start in the morning, and give the town an exhaustive search.  As he lay
thinking and planning, he presently began to reason thus:  The boy would
escape from the ruffian, his reputed father, if possible; would he go
back to London and seek his former haunts?  No, he would not do that,
he would avoid recapture. What, then, would he do?  Never having had a
friend in the world, or a protector, until he met Miles Hendon, he would
naturally try to find that friend again, provided the effort did not
require him to go toward London and danger.  He would strike for Hendon
Hall, that is what he would do, for he knew Hendon was homeward bound
and there he might expect to find him.  Yes, the case was plain to
Hendon--he must lose no more time in Southwark, but move at once through
Kent, toward Monk's Holm, searching the wood and inquiring as he went.
 Let us return to the vanished little King now.

The ruffian whom the waiter at the inn on the bridge saw 'about to join'
the youth and the King did not exactly join them, but fell in close
behind them and followed their steps.  He said nothing. His left arm was
in a sling, and he wore a large green patch over his left eye; he limped
slightly, and used an oaken staff as a support.  The youth led the King
a crooked course through Southwark, and by-and-by struck into the
high road beyond.  The King was irritated, now, and said he would stop
here--it was Hendon's place to come to him, not his to go to Hendon.  He
would not endure such insolence; he would stop where he was.  The youth
said--

"Thou'lt tarry here, and thy friend lying wounded in the wood yonder?
 So be it, then."

The King's manner changed at once.  He cried out--

"Wounded?  And who hath dared to do it?  But that is apart; lead on,
lead on!  Faster, sirrah!  Art shod with lead?  Wounded, is he?  Now
though the doer of it be a duke's son he shall rue it!"

It was some distance to the wood, but the space was speedily traversed.
The youth looked about him, discovered a bough sticking in the ground,
with a small bit of rag tied to it, then led the way into the forest,
watching for similar boughs and finding them at intervals; they were
evidently guides to the point he was aiming at.  By-and-by an open place
was reached, where were the charred remains of a farm-house, and near
them a barn which was falling to ruin and decay.  There was no sign of
life anywhere, and utter silence prevailed.  The youth entered the barn,
the King following eagerly upon his heels.  No one there! The King shot
a surprised and suspicious glance at the youth, and asked--
