
Caderousse quickly performed the stranger's bidding; and after pouring
some into a glass, and slowly swallowing its contents, the abbé,
resuming his usual placidity of manner, said, as he placed his empty
glass on the table,--"Where did we leave off?"

"The name of Edmond's betrothed was Mercédès."

"To be sure. 'You will go to Marseilles,' said Dantès,--for you
understand, I repeat his words just as he uttered them. Do you
understand?"

"Perfectly."

"'You will sell this diamond; you will divide the money into five equal
parts, and give an equal portion to these good friends, the only persons
who have loved me upon earth.'"

"But why into five parts?" asked Caderousse; "you only mentioned four
persons."

"Because the fifth is dead, as I hear. The fifth sharer in Edmond's
bequest, was his own father."

"Too true, too true!" ejaculated Caderousse, almost suffocated by the
contending passions which assailed him, "the poor old man did die."

"I learned so much at Marseilles," replied the abbé, making a strong
effort to appear indifferent; "but from the length of time that has
elapsed since the death of the elder Dantès, I was unable to obtain any
particulars of his end. Can you enlighten me on that point?"

"I do not know who could if I could not," said Caderousse. "Why, I lived
almost on the same floor with the poor old man. Ah, yes, about a year
after the disappearance of his son the poor old man died."

"Of what did he die?"

"Why, the doctors called his complaint gastro-enteritis, I believe; his
acquaintances say he died of grief; but I, who saw him in his dying
moments, I say he died of----"

Caderousse paused.

"Of what?" asked the priest, anxiously and eagerly.

"Why, of downright starvation."

"Starvation!" exclaimed the abbé, springing from his seat. "Why, the
vilest animals are not suffered to die by such a death as that. The very
dogs that wander houseless and homeless in the streets find some pitying
hand to cast them a mouthful of bread; and that a man, a Christian,
should be allowed to perish of hunger in the midst of other men who call
themselves Christians, is too horrible for belief. Oh, it is impossible-
-utterly impossible!"

"What I have said, I have said," answered Caderousse.

"And you are a fool for having said anything about it," said a voice
from the top of the stairs. "Why should you meddle with what does not
concern you?"

The two men turned quickly, and saw the sickly countenance of La
Carconte peering between the baluster rails; attracted by the sound of
voices, she had feebly dragged herself down the stairs, and, seated on
the lower step, head on knees, she had listened to the foregoing
conversation. "Mind your own business, wife," replied Caderousse
sharply. "This gentleman asks me for information, which common
politeness will not permit me to refuse."

"Politeness, you simpleton!" retorted La Carconte. "What have you to do
with politeness, I should like to know? Better study a little common
prudence. How do you know the motives that person may have for trying to
extract all he can from you?"

"I pledge you my word, madam," said the abbé, "that my intentions are
good; and that your husband can incur no risk, provided he answers me
candidly."

"Ah, that's all very fine," retorted the woman. "Nothing is easier than
to begin with fair promises and assurances of nothing to fear; but when
poor, silly folks, like my husband there, have been persuaded to tell
all they know, the promises and assurances of safety are quickly
forgotten; and at some moment when nobody is expecting it, behold
trouble and misery, and all sorts of persecutions, are heaped on the
unfortunate wretches, who cannot even see whence all their afflictions
come."

"Nay, nay, my good woman, make yourself perfectly easy, I beg of you.
Whatever evils may befall you, they will not be occasioned by my
instrumentality, that I solemnly promise you."

La Carconte muttered a few inarticulate words, then let her head again
drop upon her knees, and went into a fit of ague, leaving the two
speakers to resume the conversation, but remaining so as to be able to
hear every word they uttered. Again the abbé had been obliged to swallow
a draught of water to calm the emotions that threatened to overpower
him. When he had sufficiently recovered himself, he said, "It appears,
then, that the miserable old man you were telling me of was forsaken by
everyone. Surely, had not such been the case, he would not have perished
by so dreadful a death."

"Why, he was not altogether forsaken," continued Caderousse, "for
Mercédès the Catalan and Monsieur Morrel were very kind to him; but
somehow the poor old man had contracted a profound hatred for Fernand--
the very person," added Caderousse with a bitter smile, "that you named
just now as being one of Dantès' faithful and attached friends."

"And was he not so?" asked the abbé.

"Gaspard, Gaspard!" murmured the woman, from her seat on the stairs,
"mind what you are saying!" Caderousse made no reply to these words,
though evidently irritated and annoyed by the interruption, but,
addressing the abbé, said, "Can a man be faithful to another whose wife
he covets and desires for himself? But Dantès was so honorable and true
in his own nature, that he believed everybody's professions of
friendship. Poor Edmond, he was cruelly deceived; but it was fortunate
that he never knew, or he might have found it more difficult, when on
his deathbed, to pardon his enemies. And, whatever people may say,"
continued Caderousse, in his native language, which was not altogether
devoid of rude poetry, "I cannot help being more frightened at the idea
of the malediction of the dead than the hatred of the living."

"Imbecile!" exclaimed La Carconte.

"Do you, then, know in what manner Fernand injured Dantès?" inquired the
abbé of Caderousse.

"Do I? No one better."

"Speak out then, say what it was!"

"Gaspard!" cried La Carconte, "do as you will; you are master--but if
you take my advice you'll hold your tongue."

"Well, wife," replied Caderousse, "I don't know but what you're right!"

"So you will say nothing?" asked the abbé.

"Why, what good would it do?" asked Caderousse. "If the poor lad were
living, and came to me and begged that I would candidly tell which were
his true and which his false friends, why, perhaps, I should not
hesitate. But you tell me he is no more, and therefore can have nothing
to do with hatred or revenge, so let all such feeling be buried with
him."

"You prefer, then," said the abbé, "that I should bestow on men you say
are false and treacherous, the reward intended for faithful friendship?"

"That is true enough," returned Caderousse. "You say truly, the gift of
poor Edmond was not meant for such traitors as Fernand and Danglars;
besides, what would it be to them? no more than a drop of water in the
ocean."

"Remember," chimed in La Carconte, "those two could crush you at a
single blow!"

"How so?" inquired the abbé. "Are these persons, then, so rich and
powerful?"

"Do you not know their history?"

"I do not. Pray relate it to me!"

Caderousse seemed to reflect for a few moments, then said, "No, truly,
it would take up too much time."

"Well, my good friend," returned the abbé, in a tone that indicated
utter indifference on his part, "you are at liberty, either to speak or
be silent, just as you please; for my own part, I respect your scruples
and admire your sentiments; so let the matter end. I shall do my duty as
conscientiously as I can, and fulfil my promise to the dying man. My
first business will be to dispose of this diamond." So saying, the abbé
again drew the small box from his pocket, opened it, and contrived to
hold it in such a light, that a bright flash of brilliant hues passed
before the dazzled gaze of Caderousse.

"Wife, wife!" cried he in a hoarse voice, "come here!"

"Diamond!" exclaimed La Carconte, rising and descending to the chamber
with a tolerably firm step; "what diamond are you talking about?"

"Why, did you not hear all we said?" inquired Caderousse. "It is a
beautiful diamond left by poor Edmond Dantès, to be sold, and the money
divided between his father, Mercédès, his betrothed bride, Fernand,
Danglars, and myself. The jewel is worth at least fifty thousand
francs."

"Oh, what a magnificent jewel!" cried the astonished woman.

"The fifth part of the profits from this stone belongs to us then, does
it not?" asked Caderousse.

"It does," replied the abbé; "with the addition of an equal division of
that part intended for the elder Dantès, which I believe myself at
liberty to divide equally with the four survivors."

"And why among us four?" inquired Caderousse.

"As being the friends Edmond esteemed most faithful and devoted to him."
