"M. Beauchamp," announced the servant. "Come in, come in," said Albert,
rising and advancing to meet the young man. "Here is Debray, who detests
you without reading you, so he says."

"He is quite right," returned Beauchamp; "for I criticise him without
knowing what he does. Good-day, commander!"

"Ah, you know that already," said the private secretary, smiling and
shaking hands with him.

"_Pardieu!_"

"And what do they say of it in the world?"

"In which world? we have so many worlds in the year of grace 1838."

"In the entire political world, of which you are one of the leaders."

"They say that it is quite fair, and that sowing so much red, you ought
to reap a little blue."

"Come, come, that is not bad!" said Lucien. "Why do you not join our
party, my dear Beauchamp? With your talents you would make your fortune
in three or four years."

"I only await one thing before following your advice; that is, a
minister who will hold office for six months. My dear Albert, one word,
for I must give poor Lucien a respite. Do we breakfast or dine? I must
go to the Chamber, for our life is not an idle one."

"You only breakfast; I await two persons, and the instant they arrive we
shall sit down to table."



Chapter 40. The Breakfast

And what sort of persons do you expect to breakfast?" said Beauchamp.

"A gentleman, and a diplomatist."

"Then we shall have to wait two hours for the gentleman, and three for
the diplomatist. I shall come back to dessert; keep me some
strawberries, coffee, and cigars. I shall take a cutlet on my way to the
Chamber."

"Do not do anything of the sort; for were the gentleman a Montmorency,
and the diplomatist a Metternich, we will breakfast at eleven; in the
meantime, follow Debray's example, and take a glass of sherry and a
biscuit."

"Be it so; I will stay; I must do something to distract my thoughts."

"You are like Debray, and yet it seems to me that when the minister is
out of spirits, the opposition ought to be joyous."

"Ah, you do not know with what I am threatened. I shall hear this
morning that M. Danglars make a speech at the Chamber of Deputies, and
at his wife's this evening I shall hear the tragedy of a peer of France.
The devil take the constitutional government, and since we had our
choice, as they say, at least, how could we choose that?"

"I understand; you must lay in a stock of hilarity."

"Do not run down M. Danglars' speeches," said Debray; "he votes for you,
for he belongs to the opposition."

"_Pardieu_, that is exactly the worst of all. I am waiting until you
send him to speak at the Luxembourg, to laugh at my ease."

"My dear friend," said Albert to Beauchamp, "it is plain that the
affairs of Spain are settled, for you are most desperately out of humor
this morning. Recollect that Parisian gossip has spoken of a marriage
between myself and Mlle. Eugénie Danglars; I cannot in conscience,
therefore, let you run down the speeches of a man who will one day say
to me, 'Vicomte, you know I give my daughter two millions.'"

"Ah, this marriage will never take place," said Beauchamp. "The king has
made him a baron, and can make him a peer, but he cannot make him a
gentleman, and the Count of Morcerf is too aristocratic to consent, for
the paltry sum of two million francs, to a _mésalliance_. The Viscount
of Morcerf can only wed a marchioness."

"But two million francs make a nice little sum," replied Morcerf.

"It is the social capital of a theatre on the boulevard, or a railroad
from the Jardin des Plantes to La Râpée."

"Never mind what he says, Morcerf," said Debray, "do you marry her. You
marry a money-bag label, it is true; well, but what does that matter? It
is better to have a blazon less and a figure more on it. You have seven
martlets on your arms; give three to your wife, and you will still have
four; that is one more than M. de Guise had, who so nearly became King
of France, and whose cousin was Emperor of Germany."

"On my word, I think you are right, Lucien," said Albert absently.

"To be sure; besides, every millionaire is as noble as a bastard--that
is, he can be."

"Do not say that, Debray," returned Beauchamp, laughing, "for here is
Château-Renaud, who, to cure you of your mania for paradoxes, will pass
the sword of Renaud de Montauban, his ancestor, through your body."

"He will sully it then," returned Lucien; "for I am low--very low."

"Oh, heavens," cried Beauchamp, "the minister quotes Béranger, what
shall we come to next?"

"M. de Château-Renaud--M. Maximilian Morrel," said the servant,
announcing two fresh guests.

"Now, then, to breakfast," said Beauchamp; "for, if I remember, you told
me you only expected two persons, Albert."

"Morrel," muttered Albert--"Morrel--who is he?" But before he had
finished, M. de Château-Renaud, a handsome young man of thirty,
gentleman all over,--that is, with the figure of a Guiche and the wit of
a Mortemart,--took Albert's hand. "My dear Albert," said he, "let me
introduce to you M. Maximilian Morrel, captain of Spahis, my friend; and
what is more--however the man speaks for himself--my preserver. Salute
my hero, viscount." And he stepped on one side to give place to a young
man of refined and dignified bearing, with large and open brow, piercing
eyes, and black moustache, whom our readers have already seen at
Marseilles, under circumstances sufficiently dramatic not to be
forgotten. A rich uniform, half French, half Oriental, set off his
graceful and stalwart figure, and his broad chest was decorated with the
order of the Legion of Honor. The young officer bowed with easy and
elegant politeness. "Monsieur," said Albert with affectionate courtesy,
"the count of Château-Renaud knew how much pleasure this introduction
would give me; you are his friend, be ours also."

"Well said," interrupted Château-Renaud; "and pray that, if you should
ever be in a similar predicament, he may do as much for you as he did
for me."

"What has he done?" asked Albert.

"Oh, nothing worth speaking of," said Morrel; "M. de Château-Renaud
exaggerates."

"Not worth speaking of?" cried Château-Renaud; "life is not worth
speaking of!--that is rather too philosophical, on my word, Morrel. It
is very well for you, who risk your life every day, but for me, who only
did so once----"

"We gather from all this, baron, that Captain Morrel saved your life."

"Exactly so."

"On what occasion?" asked Beauchamp.

"Beauchamp, my good fellow, you know I am starving," said Debray: "do
not set him off on some long story."

"Well, I do not prevent your sitting down to table," replied Beauchamp,
"Château-Renaud can tell us while we eat our breakfast."

"Gentlemen," said Morcerf, "it is only a quarter past ten, and I expect
someone else."

"Ah, true, a diplomatist!" observed Debray.

"Diplomat or not, I don't know; I only know that he charged himself on
my account with a mission, which he terminated so entirely to my
satisfaction, that had I been king, I should have instantly created him
knight of all my orders, even had I been able to offer him the Golden
Fleece and the Garter."

"Well, since we are not to sit down to table," said Debray, "take a
glass of sherry, and tell us all about it."

"You all know that I had the fancy of going to Africa."

"It is a road your ancestors have traced for you," said Albert
gallantly.

"Yes? but I doubt that your object was like theirs--to rescue the Holy
Sepulchre."

"You are quite right, Beauchamp," observed the young aristocrat. "It was
only to fight as an amateur. I cannot bear duelling ever since two
seconds, whom I had chosen to arrange an affair, forced me to break the
arm of one of my best friends, one whom you all know--poor Franz
d'Epinay."

"Ah, true," said Debray, "you did fight some time ago; about what?"


"The devil take me, if I remember," returned Château-Renaud. "But I
recollect perfectly one thing, that, being unwilling to let such talents
as mine sleep, I wished to try upon the Arabs the new pistols that had
been given to me. In consequence I embarked for Oran, and went from
thence to Constantine, where I arrived just in time to witness the
raising of the siege. I retreated with the rest, for eight and forty
hours. I endured the rain during the day, and the cold during the night
tolerably well, but the third morning my horse died of cold. Poor brute-
-accustomed to be covered up and to have a stove in the stable, the
Arabian finds himself unable to bear ten degrees of cold in Arabia."

