"By all means, be as wise as Nestor and as prudent as Ulysses; I do more
than permit, I exhort you."

"Silence, then!" said Gaetano.

Everyone obeyed. For a man who, like Franz, viewed his position in its
true light, it was a grave one. He was alone in the darkness with
sailors whom he did not know, and who had no reason to be devoted to
him; who knew that he had several thousand francs in his belt, and who
had often examined his weapons,--which were very beautiful,--if not with
envy, at least with curiosity. On the other hand, he was about to land,
without any other escort than these men, on an island which had, indeed,
a very religious name, but which did not seem to Franz likely to afford
him much hospitality, thanks to the smugglers and bandits. The history
of the scuttled vessels, which had appeared improbable during the day,
seemed very probable at night; placed as he was between two possible
sources of danger, he kept his eye on the crew, and his gun in his hand.
The sailors had again hoisted sail, and the vessel was once more
cleaving the waves. Through the darkness Franz, whose eyes were now more
accustomed to it, could see the looming shore along which the boat was
sailing, and then, as they rounded a rocky point, he saw the fire more
brilliant than ever, and about it five or six persons seated. The blaze
illumined the sea for a hundred paces around. Gaetano skirted the light,
carefully keeping the boat in the shadow; then, when they were opposite
the fire, he steered to the centre of the circle, singing a fishing
song, of which his companions sung the chorus. At the first words of the
song the men seated round the fire arose and approached the landing-
place, their eyes fixed on the boat, evidently seeking to know who the
new-comers were and what were their intentions. They soon appeared
satisfied and returned (with the exception of one, who remained at the
shore) to their fire, at which the carcass of a goat was roasting. When
the boat was within twenty paces of the shore, the man on the beach, who
carried a carbine, presented arms after the manner of a sentinel, and
cried, "Who comes there?" in Sardinian. Franz coolly cocked both
barrels. Gaetano then exchanged a few words with this man which the
traveller did not understand, but which evidently concerned him. "Will
your excellency give your name, or remain _incognito_?" asked the
captain.

"My name must rest unknown,--merely say I am a Frenchman travelling for
pleasure." As soon as Gaetano had transmitted this answer, the sentinel
gave an order to one of the men seated round the fire, who rose and
disappeared among the rocks. Not a word was spoken, everyone seemed
occupied, Franz with his disembarkment, the sailors with their sails,
the smugglers with their goat; but in the midst of all this carelessness
it was evident that they mutually observed each other. The man who had
disappeared returned suddenly on the opposite side to that by which he
had left; he made a sign with his head to the sentinel, who, turning to
the boat, said, "_S'accommodi_." The Italian _s'accommodi_ is
untranslatable; it means at once, "Come, enter, you are welcome; make
yourself at home; you are the master." It is like that Turkish phrase of
Molière's that so astonished the bourgeois gentleman by the number of
things implied in its utterance. The sailors did not wait for a second
invitation; four strokes of the oar brought them to land; Gaetano sprang
to shore, exchanged a few words with the sentinel, then his comrades
disembarked, and lastly came Franz. One of his guns was swung over his
shoulder, Gaetano had the other, and a sailor held his rifle; his dress,
half artist, half dandy, did not excite any suspicion, and,
consequently, no disquietude. The boat was moored to the shore, and they
advanced a few paces to find a comfortable bivouac; but, doubtless, the
spot they chose did not suit the smuggler who filled the post of
sentinel, for he cried out, "Not that way, if you please."

Gaetano faltered an excuse, and advanced to the opposite side, while two
sailors kindled torches at the fire to light them on their way. They
advanced about thirty paces, and then stopped at a small esplanade
surrounded with rocks, in which seats had been cut, not unlike sentry-
boxes. Around in the crevices of the rocks grew a few dwarf oaks and
thick bushes of myrtles. Franz lowered a torch, and saw by the mass of
cinders that had accumulated that he was not the first to discover this
retreat, which was, doubtless, one of the halting-places of the
wandering visitors of Monte Cristo. As for his suspicions, once on
_terra firma_, once that he had seen the indifferent, if not friendly,
appearance of his hosts, his anxiety had quite disappeared, or rather,
at sight of the goat, had turned to appetite. He mentioned this to
Gaetano, who replied that nothing could be more easy than to prepare a
supper when they had in their boat, bread, wine, half a dozen
partridges, and a good fire to roast them by. "Besides," added he, "if
the smell of their roast meat tempts you, I will go and offer them two
of our birds for a slice."

"You are a born diplomat," returned Franz; "go and try."

Meanwhile the sailors had collected dried sticks and branches with which
they made a fire. Franz waited impatiently, inhaling the aroma of the
roasted meat, when the captain returned with a mysterious air.

"Well," said Franz, "anything new?--do they refuse?"

"On the contrary," returned Gaetano, "the chief, who was told you were a
young Frenchman, invites you to sup with him."

"Well," observed Franz, "this chief is very polite, and I see no
objection--the more so as I bring my share of the supper."

"Oh, it is not that; he has plenty, and to spare, for supper; but he
makes one condition, and rather a peculiar one, before he will receive
you at his house."

"His house? Has he built one here, then?"

"No, but he has a very comfortable one all the same, so they say."

"You know this chief, then?"

"I have heard talk of him."

"Favorably or otherwise?"

"Both."

"The deuce!--and what is this condition?"

"That you are blindfolded, and do not take off the bandage until he
himself bids you." Franz looked at Gaetano, to see, if possible, what he
thought of this proposal. "Ah," replied he, guessing Franz's thought, "I
know this is a serious matter."

"What should you do in my place?"

"I, who have nothing to lose,--I should go."

"You would accept?"

"Yes, were it only out of curiosity."

"There is something very peculiar about this chief, then?"


"Listen," said Gaetano, lowering his voice, "I do not know if what they
say is true"--he stopped to see if anyone was near.

"What do they say?"

"That this chief inhabits a cavern to which the Pitti Palace is
nothing."

"What nonsense!" said Franz, reseating himself.

"It is no nonsense; it is quite true. Cama, the pilot of the _Saint
Ferdinand_, went in once, and he came back amazed, vowing that such
treasures were only to be heard of in fairy tales."

"Do you know," observed Franz, "that with such stories you make me think
of Ali Baba's enchanted cavern?"

"I tell you what I have been told."

"Then you advise me to accept?"

"Oh, I don't say that; your excellency will do as you please; I should
be sorry to advise you in the matter."

Franz pondered the matter for a few moments, concluded that a man so
rich could not have any intention of plundering him of what little he
had, and seeing only the prospect of a good supper, accepted. Gaetano
departed with the reply. Franz was prudent, and wished to learn all he
possibly could concerning his host. He turned towards the sailor, who,
during this dialogue, had sat gravely plucking the partridges with the
air of a man proud of his office, and asked him how these men had
landed, as no vessel of any kind was visible.

"Never mind that," returned the sailor, "I know their vessel."

"Is it a very beautiful vessel?"

"I would not wish for a better to sail round the world."

"Of what burden is she?"

"About a hundred tons; but she is built to stand any weather. She is
what the English call a yacht."

"Where was she built?"

"I know not; but my own opinion is she is a Genoese."

"And how did a leader of smugglers," continued Franz, "venture to build
a vessel designed for such a purpose at Genoa?"

"I did not say that the owner was a smuggler," replied the sailor.

"No; but Gaetano did, I thought."

"Gaetano had only seen the vessel from a distance, he had not then
spoken to anyone."

"And if this person be not a smuggler, who is he?"

"A wealthy signor, who travels for his pleasure."

"Come," thought Franz, "he is still more mysterious, since the two
accounts do not agree."

"What is his name?"

"If you ask him, he says Sinbad the Sailor; but I doubt if it be his
real name."

"Sinbad the Sailor?"
