Pampinara had disappeared. Their disappearance at first caused much
disquietude; but it was soon known that they had joined Cucumetto. After
some time Cucumetto became the object of universal attention; the most
extraordinary traits of ferocious daring and brutality were related of
him.

"One day he carried off a young girl, the daughter of a surveyor of
Frosinone. The bandit's laws are positive; a young girl belongs first to
him who carries her off, then the rest draw lots for her, and she is
abandoned to their brutality until death relieves her sufferings. When
their parents are sufficiently rich to pay a ransom, a messenger is sent
to negotiate; the prisoner is hostage for the security of the messenger;
should the ransom be refused, the prisoner is irrevocably lost. The
young girl's lover was in Cucumetto's troop; his name was Carlini. When
she recognized her lover, the poor girl extended her arms to him, and
believed herself safe; but Carlini felt his heart sink, for he but too
well knew the fate that awaited her. However, as he was a favorite with
Cucumetto, as he had for three years faithfully served him, and as he
had saved his life by shooting a dragoon who was about to cut him down,
he hoped the chief would have pity on him. He took Cucumetto one side,
while the young girl, seated at the foot of a huge pine that stood in
the centre of the forest, made a veil of her picturesque head-dress to
hide her face from the lascivious gaze of the bandits. There he told the
chief all--his affection for the prisoner, their promises of mutual
fidelity, and how every night, since he had been near, they had met in
some neighboring ruins.


"It so happened that night that Cucumetto had sent Carlini to a village,
so that he had been unable to go to the place of meeting. Cucumetto had
been there, however, by accident, as he said, and had carried the maiden
off. Carlini besought his chief to make an exception in Rita's favor, as
her father was rich, and could pay a large ransom. Cucumetto seemed to
yield to his friend's entreaties, and bade him find a shepherd to send
to Rita's father at Frosinone.

"Carlini flew joyfully to Rita, telling her she was saved, and bidding
her write to her father, to inform him what had occurred, and that her
ransom was fixed at three hundred piastres. Twelve hours' delay was all
that was granted--that is, until nine the next morning. The instant the
letter was written, Carlini seized it, and hastened to the plain to find
a messenger. He found a young shepherd watching his flock. The natural
messengers of the bandits are the shepherds who live between the city
and the mountains, between civilized and savage life. The boy undertook
the commission, promising to be in Frosinone in less than an hour.
Carlini returned, anxious to see his mistress, and announce the joyful
intelligence. He found the troop in the glade, supping off the
provisions exacted as contributions from the peasants; but his eye
vainly sought Rita and Cucumetto among them.

"He inquired where they were, and was answered by a burst of laughter. A
cold perspiration burst from every pore, and his hair stood on end. He
repeated his question. One of the bandits rose, and offered him a glass
filled with Orvietto, saying, 'To the health of the brave Cucumetto and
the fair Rita.' At this moment Carlini heard a woman's cry; he divined
the truth, seized the glass, broke it across the face of him who
presented it, and rushed towards the spot whence the cry came. After a
hundred yards he turned the corner of the thicket; he found Rita
senseless in the arms of Cucumetto. At the sight of Carlini, Cucumetto
rose, a pistol in each hand. The two brigands looked at each other for a
moment--the one with a smile of lasciviousness on his lips, the other
with the pallor of death on his brow. A terrible battle between the two
men seemed imminent; but by degrees Carlini's features relaxed, his
hand, which had grasped one of the pistols in his belt, fell to his
side. Rita lay between them. The moon lighted the group.

"'Well,' said Cucumetto, 'have you executed your commission?'

"'Yes, captain,' returned Carlini. 'At nine o'clock tomorrow Rita's
father will be here with the money.'--'It is well; in the meantime, we
will have a merry night; this young girl is charming, and does credit to
your taste. Now, as I am not egotistical, we will return to our comrades
and draw lots for her.'--'You have determined, then, to abandon her to
the common law?' said Carlini.

"'Why should an exception be made in her favor?'

"'I thought that my entreaties----'

"'What right have you, any more than the rest, to ask for an exception?'

"'It is true.'

"'But never mind,' continued Cucumetto, laughing, 'sooner or later your
turn will come.' Carlini's teeth clenched convulsively.

"'Now, then,' said Cucumetto, advancing towards the other bandits, 'are
you coming?'

"'I follow you.'


"Cucumetto departed, without losing sight of Carlini, for, doubtless, he
feared lest he should strike him unawares; but nothing betrayed a
hostile design on Carlini's part. He was standing, his arms folded, near
Rita, who was still insensible. Cucumetto fancied for a moment the young
man was about to take her in his arms and fly; but this mattered little
to him now Rita had been his; and as for the money, three hundred
piastres distributed among the band was so small a sum that he cared
little about it. He continued to follow the path to the glade; but, to
his great surprise, Carlini arrived almost as soon as himself. 'Let us
draw lots! let us draw lots!' cried all the brigands, when they saw the
chief.

"Their demand was fair, and the chief inclined his head in sign of
acquiescence. The eyes of all shone fiercely as they made their demand,
and the red light of the fire made them look like demons. The names of
all, including Carlini, were placed in a hat, and the youngest of the
band drew forth a ticket; the ticket bore the name of Diavolaccio. He
was the man who had proposed to Carlini the health of their chief, and
to whom Carlini replied by breaking the glass across his face. A large
wound, extending from the temple to the mouth, was bleeding profusely.
Diavolaccio, seeing himself thus favored by fortune, burst into a loud
laugh.

"'Captain,' said he, 'just now Carlini would not drink your health when
I proposed it to him; propose mine to him, and let us see if he will be
more condescending to you than to me.' Everyone expected an explosion on
Carlini's part; but to their great surprise, he took a glass in one hand
and a flask in the other, and filling it,--

"'Your health, Diavolaccio,' said he calmly, and he drank it off,
without his hand trembling in the least. Then sitting down by the fire,
'My supper,' said he; 'my expedition has given me an appetite.'

"'Well done, Carlini!' cried the brigands; 'that is acting like a good
fellow;' and they all formed a circle round the fire, while Diavolaccio
disappeared.

"Carlini ate and drank as if nothing had happened. The bandits looked on
with astonishment at this singular conduct until they heard footsteps.
They turned round, and saw Diavolaccio bearing the young girl in his
arms. Her head hung back, and her long hair swept the ground. As they
entered the circle, the bandits could perceive, by the firelight, the
unearthly pallor of the young girl and of Diavolaccio. This apparition
was so strange and so solemn, that everyone rose, with the exception of
Carlini, who remained seated, and ate and drank calmly. Diavolaccio
advanced amidst the most profound silence, and laid Rita at the
captain's feet. Then everyone could understand the cause of the
unearthly pallor in the young girl and the bandit. A knife was plunged
up to the hilt in Rita's left breast. Everyone looked at Carlini; the
sheath at his belt was empty.

"'Ah, ah,' said the chief, 'I now understand why Carlini stayed behind.'

"All savage natures appreciate a desperate deed. No other of the bandits
would, perhaps, have done the same; but they all understood what Carlini
had done.

"'Now, then,' cried Carlini, rising in his turn, and approaching the
corpse, his hand on the butt of one of his pistols, 'does anyone dispute
the possession of this woman with me?'

"'No,' returned the chief, 'she is thine.'

"Carlini raised her in his arms, and carried her out of the circle of
firelight. Cucumetto placed his sentinels for the night, and the bandits
wrapped themselves in their cloaks, and lay down before the fire. At
midnight the sentinel gave the alarm, and in an instant all were on the
alert. It was Rita's father, who brought his daughter's ransom in
person.

"'Here,' said he, to Cucumetto, 'here are three hundred piastres; give
me back my child.

"But the chief, without taking the money, made a sign to him to follow.
The old man obeyed. They both advanced beneath the trees, through whose
branches streamed the moonlight. Cucumetto stopped at last, and pointed
to two persons grouped at the foot of a tree.

"'There,' said he, 'demand thy child of Carlini; he will tell thee what
has become of her;' and he returned to his companions.

"The old man remained motionless; he felt that some great and unforeseen
misfortune hung over his head. At length he advanced toward the group,
the meaning of which he could not comprehend. As he approached, Carlini
raised his head, and the forms of two persons became visible to the old
man's eyes. A woman lay on the ground, her head resting on the knees of
a man, who was seated by her; as he raised his head, the woman's face
became visible. The old man recognized his child, and Carlini recognized
the old man.

"'I expected thee,' said the bandit to Rita's father.

"'Wretch!' returned the old man, 'what hast thou done?' and he gazed
with terror on Rita, pale and bloody, a knife buried in her bosom. A ray
of moonlight poured through the trees, and lighted up the face of the
dead.

"'Cucumetto had violated thy daughter,' said the bandit; 'I loved her,
therefore I slew her; for she would have served as the sport of the
whole band.' The old man spoke not, and grew pale as death. 'Now,'
continued Carlini, 'if I have done wrongly, avenge her;' and withdrawing
the knife from the wound in Rita's bosom, he held it out to the old man
with one hand, while with the other he tore open his vest.

"'Thou hast done well!' returned the old man in a hoarse voice; 'embrace
me, my son.'


