never more than a fourth of what they appear to be, like the locomotive
on a railway, the size of which is magnified by the smoke and steam
surrounding it. Well, out of the five or six millions which form your
real capital, you have just lost nearly two millions, which must, of
course, in the same degree diminish your credit and fictitious fortune;
to follow out my simile, your skin has been opened by bleeding, and this
if repeated three or four times will cause death--so pay attention to
it, my dear Monsieur Danglars. Do you want money? Do you wish me to lend
you some?"


"What a bad calculator you are!" exclaimed Danglars, calling to his
assistance all his philosophy and dissimulation. "I have made money at
the same time by speculations which have succeeded. I have made up the
loss of blood by nutrition. I lost a battle in Spain, I have been
defeated in Trieste, but my naval army in India will have taken some
galleons, and my Mexican pioneers will have discovered some mine."

"Very good, very good! But the wound remains and will reopen at the
first loss."

"No, for I am only embarked in certainties," replied Danglars, with the
air of a mountebank sounding his own praises; "to involve me, three
governments must crumble to dust."

"Well, such things have been."

"That there should be a famine!"

"Recollect the seven fat and the seven lean kine."

"Or, that the sea should become dry, as in the days of Pharaoh, and even
then my vessels would become caravans."

"So much the better. I congratulate you, my dear M. Danglars," said
Monte Cristo; "I see I was deceived, and that you belong to the class of
second-rate fortunes."

"I think I may aspire to that honor," said Danglars with a smile, which
reminded Monte Cristo of the sickly moons which bad artists are so fond
of daubing into their pictures of ruins. "But, while we are speaking of
business," Danglars added, pleased to find an opportunity of changing
the subject, "tell me what I am to do for M. Cavalcanti."

"Give him money, if he is recommended to you, and the recommendation
seems good."

"Excellent; he presented himself this morning with a bond of 40,000
francs, payable at sight, on you, signed by Busoni, and returned by you
to me, with your endorsement--of course, I immediately counted him over
the forty bank-notes."

Monte Cristo nodded his head in token of assent. "But that is not all,"
continued Danglars; "he has opened an account with my house for his
son."

"May I ask how much he allows the young man?"

"Five thousand francs per month."

"Sixty thousand francs per year. I thought I was right in believing that
Cavalcanti to be a stingy fellow. How can a young man live upon 5,000
francs a month?"

"But you understand that if the young man should want a few thousands
more----"

"Do not advance it; the father will never repay it. You do not know
these ultramontane millionaires; they are regular misers. And by whom
were they recommended to you?"

"Oh, by the house of Fenzi, one of the best in Florence."

"I do not mean to say you will lose, but, nevertheless, mind you hold to
the terms of the agreement."

"Would you not trust the Cavalcanti?"

"I? oh, I would advance ten millions on his signature. I was only
speaking in reference to the second-rate fortunes we were mentioning
just now."

"And with all this, how unassuming he is! I should never have taken him
for anything more than a mere major."

"And you would have flattered him, for certainly, as you say, he has no
manner. The first time I saw him he appeared to me like an old
lieutenant who had grown mouldy under his epaulets. But all the Italians
are the same; they are like old Jews when they are not glittering in
Oriental splendor."

"The young man is better," said Danglars.

"Yes; a little nervous, perhaps, but, upon the whole, he appeared
tolerable. I was uneasy about him."

"Why?"

"Because you met him at my house, just after his introduction into the
world, as they told me. He has been travelling with a very severe tutor,
and had never been to Paris before."

"Ah, I believe noblemen marry amongst themselves, do they not?" asked
Danglars carelessly; "they like to unite their fortunes."

"It is usual, certainly; but Cavalcanti is an original who does nothing
like other people. I cannot help thinking that he has brought his son to
France to choose a wife."

"Do you think so?"

"I am sure of it."

"And you have heard his fortune mentioned?"

"Nothing else was talked of; only some said he was worth millions, and
others that he did not possess a farthing."

"And what is your opinion?"

"I ought not to influence you, because it is only my own personal
impression."

"Well, and it is that----"

"My opinion is, that all these old _podestàs_, these ancient
_condottieri_,--for the Cavalcanti have commanded armies and governed
provinces,--my opinion, I say, is, that they have buried their millions
in corners, the secret of which they have transmitted only to their
eldest sons, who have done the same from generation to generation; and
the proof of this is seen in their yellow and dry appearance, like the
florins of the republic, which, from being constantly gazed upon, have
become reflected in them."

"Certainly," said Danglars, "and this is further supported by the fact
of their not possessing an inch of land."

"Very little, at least; I know of none which Cavalcanti possesses,
excepting his palace in Lucca."

"Ah, he has a palace?" said Danglars, laughing; "come, that is
something."

"Yes; and more than that, he lets it to the Minister of Finance while he
lives in a simple house. Oh, as I told you before, I think the old
fellow is very close."

"Come, you do not flatter him."

"I scarcely know him; I think I have seen him three times in my life;
all I know relating to him is through Busoni and himself. He was telling
me this morning that, tired of letting his property lie dormant in
Italy, which is a dead nation, he wished to find a method, either in
France or England, of multiplying his millions, but remember, that
though I place great confidence in Busoni, I am not responsible for
this."

"Never mind; accept my thanks for the client you have sent me. It is a
fine name to inscribe on my ledgers, and my cashier was quite proud of
it when I explained to him who the Cavalcanti were. By the way, this is
merely a simple question, when this sort of people marry their sons, do
they give them any fortune?"

"Oh, that depends upon circumstances. I know an Italian prince, rich as
a gold mine, one of the noblest families in Tuscany, who, when his sons
married according to his wish, gave them millions; and when they married
against his consent, merely allowed them thirty crowns a month. Should
Andrea marry according to his father's views, he will, perhaps, give him
one, two, or three millions. For example, supposing it were the daughter
of a banker, he might take an interest in the house of the father-in-law
of his son; then again, if he disliked his choice, the major takes the
key, double-locks his coffer, and Master Andrea would be obliged to live
like the sons of a Parisian family, by shuffling cards or rattling the
dice."

"Ah, that boy will find out some Bavarian or Peruvian princess; he will
want a crown, an El Dorado, and Potosí."

"No; these grand lords on the other side of the Alps frequently marry
into plain families; like Jupiter, they like to cross the race. But do
you wish to marry Andrea, my dear M. Danglars, that you are asking so
many questions?"

"_Ma foi_," said Danglars, "it would not be a bad speculation, I fancy,
and you know I am a speculator."

"You are not thinking of Mademoiselle Danglars, I hope; you would not
like poor Andrea to have his throat cut by Albert?"

"Albert," repeated Danglars, shrugging his shoulders; "ah, well; he
would care very little about it, I think."

"But he is betrothed to your daughter, I believe?"

"Well, M. de Morcerf and I have talked about this marriage, but Madame
de Morcerf and Albert----"

"You do not mean to say that it would not be a good match?"

"Indeed, I imagine that Mademoiselle Danglars is as good as M. de
