
"I am ready to accompany you, sir," said Maximilian. "Adieu, my kind
friends! Emmanuel--Julie--farewell!"

"How farewell?" exclaimed Julie; "do you leave us thus, so suddenly,
without any preparations for your journey, without even a passport?"

"Needless delays but increase the grief of parting," said Monte Cristo,
"and Maximilian has doubtless provided himself with everything
requisite; at least, I advised him to do so."

"I have a passport, and my clothes are ready packed," said Morrel in his
tranquil but mournful manner.

"Good," said Monte Cristo, smiling; "in these prompt arrangements we
recognize the order of a well-disciplined soldier."

"And you leave us," said Julie, "at a moment's warning? you do not give
us a day--no, not even an hour before your departure?"

"My carriage is at the door, madame, and I must be in Rome in five
days."

"But does Maximilian go to Rome?" exclaimed Emmanuel.

"I am going wherever it may please the count to take me," said Morrel,
with a smile full of grief; "I am under his orders for the next month."

"Oh, heavens, how strangely he expresses himself, count!" said Julie.

"Maximilian goes with _me_," said the count, in his kindest and most
persuasive manner; "therefore do not make yourself uneasy on your
brother's account."

"Once more farewell, my dear sister; Emmanuel, adieu!" Morrel repeated.

"His carelessness and indifference touch me to the heart," said Julie.
"Oh, Maximilian, Maximilian, you are certainly concealing something from
us."

"Pshaw!" said Monte Cristo, "you will see him return to you gay,
smiling, and joyful."


Maximilian cast a look of disdain, almost of anger, on the count.

"We must leave you," said Monte Cristo.

"Before you quit us, count," said Julie, "will you permit us to express
to you all that the other day----"

"Madame," interrupted the count, taking her two hands in his, "all that
you could say in words would never express what I read in your eyes; the
thoughts of your heart are fully understood by mine. Like benefactors in
romances, I should have left you without seeing you again, but that
would have been a virtue beyond my strength, because I am a weak and
vain man, fond of the tender, kind, and thankful glances of my fellow-
creatures. On the eve of departure I carry my egotism so far as to say,
'Do not forget me, my kind friends, for probably you will never see me
again.'"

"Never see you again?" exclaimed Emmanuel, while two large tears rolled
down Julie's cheeks, "never behold you again? It is not a man, then, but
some angel that leaves us, and this angel is on the point of returning
to heaven after having appeared on earth to do good."

"Say not so," quickly returned Monte Cristo--"say not so, my friends;
angels never err, celestial beings remain where they wish to be. Fate is
not more powerful than they; it is they who, on the contrary, overcome
fate. No, Emmanuel, I am but a man, and your admiration is as unmerited
as your words are sacrilegious."

And pressing his lips on the hand of Julie, who rushed into his arms, he
extended his other hand to Emmanuel; then tearing himself from this
abode of peace and happiness, he made a sign to Maximilian, who followed
him passively, with the indifference which had been perceptible in him
ever since the death of Valentine had so stunned him.

"Restore my brother to peace and happiness," whispered Julie to Monte
Cristo. And the count pressed her hand in reply, as he had done eleven
years before on the staircase leading to Morrel's study.

"You still confide, then, in Sinbad the Sailor?" asked he, smiling.

"Oh, yes," was the ready answer.

"Well, then, sleep in peace, and put your trust in heaven."

As we have before said, the postchaise was waiting; four powerful horses
were already pawing the ground with impatience, while Ali, apparently
just arrived from a long walk, was standing at the foot of the steps,
his face bathed in perspiration.

"Well," asked the count in Arabic, "have you been to see the old man?"
Ali made a sign in the affirmative.

"And have you placed the letter before him, as I ordered you to do?"

The slave respectfully signalized that he had. "And what did he say, or
rather do?" Ali placed himself in the light, so that his master might
see him distinctly, and then imitating in his intelligent manner the
countenance of the old man, he closed his eyes, as Noirtier was in the
custom of doing when saying "Yes."

"Good; he accepts," said Monte Cristo. "Now let us go."


These words had scarcely escaped him, when the carriage was on its way,
and the feet of the horses struck a shower of sparks from the pavement.
Maximilian settled himself in his corner without uttering a word. Half
an hour had passed when the carriage stopped suddenly; the count had
just pulled the silken check-string, which was fastened to Ali's finger.
The Nubian immediately descended and opened the carriage door. It was a
lovely starlight night--they had just reached the top of the hill
Villejuif, from whence Paris appears like a sombre sea tossing its
millions of phosphoric waves into light--waves indeed more noisy, more
passionate, more changeable, more furious, more greedy, than those of
the tempestuous ocean,--waves which never rest as those of the sea
sometimes do,--waves ever dashing, ever foaming, ever ingulfing what
falls within their grasp.

The count stood alone, and at a sign from his hand, the carriage went on
for a short distance. With folded arms, he gazed for some time upon the
great city. When he had fixed his piercing look on this modern Babylon,
which equally engages the contemplation of the religious enthusiast, the
materialist, and the scoffer,--

"Great city," murmured he, inclining his head, and joining his hands as
if in prayer, "less than six months have elapsed since first I entered
thy gates. I believe that the Spirit of God led my steps to thee and
that he also enables me to quit thee in triumph; the secret cause of my
presence within thy walls I have confided alone to him who only has had
the power to read my heart. God only knows that I retire from thee
without pride or hatred, but not without many regrets; he only knows
that the power confided to me has never been made subservient to my
personal good or to any useless cause. Oh, great city, it is in thy
palpitating bosom that I have found that which I sought; like a patient
miner, I have dug deep into thy very entrails to root out evil thence.
Now my work is accomplished, my mission is terminated, now thou canst
neither afford me pain nor pleasure. Adieu, Paris, adieu!"

His look wandered over the vast plain like that of some genius of the
night; he passed his hand over his brow, got into the carriage, the door
was closed on him, and the vehicle quickly disappeared down the other
side of the hill in a whirlwind of dust and noise.

Ten leagues were passed and not a single word was uttered.

Morrel was dreaming, and Monte Cristo was looking at the dreamer.

"Morrel," said the count to him at length, "do you repent having
followed me?"

"No, count; but to leave Paris----"

"If I thought happiness might await you in Paris, Morrel, I would have
left you there."

"Valentine reposes within the walls of Paris, and to leave Paris is like
losing her a second time."

"Maximilian," said the count, "the friends that we have lost do not
repose in the bosom of the earth, but are buried deep in our hearts, and
it has been thus ordained that we may always be accompanied by them. I
have two friends, who in this way never depart from me; the one who gave
me being, and the other who conferred knowledge and intelligence on me.
Their spirits live in me. I consult them when doubtful, and if I ever do
any good, it is due to their beneficent counsels. Listen to the voice of
your heart, Morrel, and ask it whether you ought to preserve this
melancholy exterior towards me."

"My friend," said Maximilian, "the voice of my heart is very sorrowful,
and promises me nothing but misfortune."

"It is the way of weakened minds to see everything through a black
cloud. The soul forms its own horizons; your soul is darkened, and
consequently the sky of the future appears stormy and unpromising."

"That may possibly be true," said Maximilian, and he again subsided into
his thoughtful mood.

The journey was performed with that marvellous rapidity which the
unlimited power of the count ever commanded. Towns fled from them like
shadows on their path, and trees shaken by the first winds of autumn
seemed like giants madly rushing on to meet them, and retreating as
rapidly when once reached. The following morning they arrived at
Châlons, where the count's steamboat waited for them. Without the loss
of an instant, the carriage was placed on board and the two travellers
embarked without delay. The boat was built for speed; her two paddle-
wheels were like two wings with which she skimmed the water like a bird.

Morrel was not insensible to that sensation of delight which is
generally experienced in passing rapidly through the air, and the wind
which occasionally raised the hair from his forehead seemed on the point
of dispelling momentarily the clouds collected there.

As the distance increased between the travellers and Paris, almost
superhuman serenity appeared to surround the count; he might have been
taken for an exile about to revisit his native land. Ere long Marseilles
presented herself to view,--Marseilles, white, fervid, full of life and
