the head and shoulders of the unhappy sufferer. "Let us horsewhip the
fine gentleman!" said others.


* _Savate_: an old shoe.

But Andrea, turning towards them, winked his eyes, rolled his tongue
around his cheeks, and smacked his lips in a manner equivalent to a
hundred words among the bandits when forced to be silent. It was a
Masonic sign Caderousse had taught him. He was immediately recognized as
one of them; the handkerchief was thrown down, and the iron-heeled shoe
replaced on the foot of the wretch to whom it belonged. Some voices were
heard to say that the gentleman was right; that he intended to be civil,
in his way, and that they would set the example of liberty of
conscience,--and the mob retired. The keeper was so stupefied at this
scene that he took Andrea by the hands and began examining his person,
attributing the sudden submission of the inmates of the Lions' Den to
something more substantial than mere fascination. Andrea made no
resistance, although he protested against it. Suddenly a voice was heard
at the wicket. "Benedetto!" exclaimed an inspector. The keeper relaxed
his hold. "I am called," said Andrea. "To the visitors' room!" said the
same voice.

"You see someone pays me a visit. Ah, my dear sir, you will see whether
a Cavalcanti is to be treated like a common person!" And Andrea, gliding
through the court like a black shadow, rushed out through the wicket,
leaving his comrades, and even the keeper, lost in wonder. Certainly a
call to the visitors' room had scarcely astonished Andrea less than
themselves, for the wily youth, instead of making use of his privilege
of waiting to be claimed on his entry into La Force, had maintained a
rigid silence. "Everything," he said, "proves me to be under the
protection of some powerful person,--this sudden fortune, the facility
with which I have overcome all obstacles, an unexpected family and an
illustrious name awarded to me, gold showered down upon me, and the most
splendid alliances about to be entered into. An unhappy lapse of fortune
and the absence of my protector have cast me down, certainly, but not
forever. The hand which has retreated for a while will be again
stretched forth to save me at the very moment when I shall think myself
sinking into the abyss. Why should I risk an imprudent step? It might
alienate my protector. He has two means of extricating me from this
dilemma,--the one by a mysterious escape, managed through bribery; the
other by buying off my judges with gold. I will say and do nothing until
I am convinced that he has quite abandoned me, and then----"


Andrea had formed a plan which was tolerably clever. The unfortunate
youth was intrepid in the attack, and rude in the defence. He had borne
with the public prison, and with privations of all sorts; still, by
degrees nature, or rather custom, had prevailed, and he suffered from
being naked, dirty, and hungry. It was at this moment of discomfort that
the inspector's voice called him to the visiting-room. Andrea felt his
heart leap with joy. It was too soon for a visit from the examining
magistrate, and too late for one from the director of the prison, or the
doctor; it must, then, be the visitor he hoped for. Behind the grating
of the room into which Andrea had been led, he saw, while his eyes
dilated with surprise, the dark and intelligent face of M. Bertuccio,
who was also gazing with sad astonishment upon the iron bars, the bolted
doors, and the shadow which moved behind the other grating.

"Ah," said Andrea, deeply affected.

"Good morning, Benedetto," said Bertuccio, with his deep, hollow voice.

"You--you?" said the young man, looking fearfully around him.

"Do you not recognize me, unhappy child?"

"Silence,--be silent!" said Andrea, who knew the delicate sense of
hearing possessed by the walls; "for heaven's sake, do not speak so
loud!"

"You wish to speak with me alone, do you not?" said Bertuccio.

"Oh, yes."

"That is well." And Bertuccio, feeling in his pocket, signed to a keeper
whom he saw through the window of the wicket.

"Read?" he said.

"What is that?" asked Andrea.

"An order to conduct you to a room, and to leave you there to talk to
me."

"Oh," cried Andrea, leaping with joy. Then he mentally added,--"Still my
unknown protector! I am not forgotten. They wish for secrecy, since we
are to converse in a private room. I understand, Bertuccio has been sent
by my protector."

The keeper spoke for a moment with an official, then opened the iron
gates and conducted Andrea to a room on the first floor. The room was
whitewashed, as is the custom in prisons, but it looked quite brilliant
to a prisoner, though a stove, a bed, a chair, and a table formed the
whole of its sumptuous furniture. Bertuccio sat down upon the chair,
Andrea threw himself upon the bed; the keeper retired.

"Now," said the steward, "what have you to tell me?"

"And you?" said Andrea.

"You speak first."

"Oh, no. You must have much to tell me, since you have come to seek me."


"Well, be it so. You have continued your course of villany; you have
robbed--you have assassinated."

"Well, I should say! If you had me taken to a private room only to tell
me this, you might have saved yourself the trouble. I know all these
things. But there are some with which, on the contrary, I am not
acquainted. Let us talk of those, if you please. Who sent you?"

"Come, come, you are going on quickly, M. Benedetto!"

"Yes, and to the point. Let us dispense with useless words. Who sends
you?"

"No one."

"How did you know I was in prison?"

"I recognized you, some time since, as the insolent dandy who so
gracefully mounted his horse in the Champs-Élysées."

"Oh, the Champs-Élysées? Ah, yes; we burn, as they say at the game of
pincette. The Champs-Élysées? Come, let us talk a little about my
father."

"Who, then, am I?"

"You, sir?--you are my adopted father. But it was not you, I presume,
who placed at my disposal 100,000 francs, which I spent in four or five
months; it was not you who manufactured an Italian gentleman for my
father; it was not you who introduced me into the world, and had me
invited to a certain dinner at Auteuil, which I fancy I am eating at
this moment, in company with the most distinguished people in Paris--
amongst the rest with a certain procureur, whose acquaintance I did very
wrong not to cultivate, for he would have been very useful to me just
now;--it was not you, in fact, who bailed me for one or two millions,
when the fatal discovery of my little secret took place. Come, speak, my
worthy Corsican, speak!"

"What do you wish me to say?"

"I will help you. You were speaking of the Champs-Élysées just now,
worthy foster-father."

"Well?"

"Well, in the Champs-Élysées there resides a very rich gentleman."

"At whose house you robbed and murdered, did you not?"

"I believe I did."

"The Count of Monte Cristo?"

"'Tis you who have named him, as M. Racine says. Well, am I to rush into
his arms, and strain him to my heart, crying, 'My father, my father!'
like Monsieur Pixérécourt." [*]

"Do not let us jest," gravely replied Bertuccio, "and dare not to utter
that name again as you have pronounced it."


* Guilbert de Pixérécourt, French dramatist (1773-1844).

"Bah," said Andrea, a little overcome, by the solemnity of Bertuccio's
manner, "why not?"

"Because the person who bears it is too highly favored by heaven to be
the father of such a wretch as you."

"Oh, these are fine words."

"And there will be fine doings, if you do not take care."

"Menaces--I do not fear them. I will say----"

"Do you think you are engaged with a pygmy like yourself?" said
Bertuccio, in so calm a tone, and with so steadfast a look, that Andrea
was moved to the very soul. "Do you think you have to do with galley-
slaves, or novices in the world? Benedetto, you are fallen into terrible
hands; they are ready to open for you--make use of them. Do not play
with the thunderbolt they have laid aside for a moment, but which they
can take up again instantly, if you attempt to intercept their
movements."


"My father--I will know who my father is," said the obstinate youth; "I
will perish if I must, but I _will_ know it. What does scandal signify
to me? What possessions, what reputation, what 'pull,' as Beauchamp
says,--have I? You great people always lose something by scandal,
notwithstanding your millions. Come, who is my father?"

"I came to tell you."

"Ah," cried Benedetto, his eyes sparkling with joy. Just then the door
