upset." We insert this joke to prove that the general was not in the
least compelled to attend the meeting, but that he came willingly. When
they were seated in the carriage the president reminded the general of
his promise to allow his eyes to be bandaged, to which he made no
opposition. On the road the president thought he saw the general make an
attempt to remove the handkerchief, and reminded him of his oath. "Sure
enough," said the general. The carriage stopped at an alley leading out
of the Rue Saint-Jacques. The general alighted, leaning on the arm of
the president, of whose dignity he was not aware, considering him simply
as a member of the club; they went through the alley, mounted a flight
of stairs, and entered the assembly-room.

"'The deliberations had already begun. The members, apprised of the sort
of presentation which was to be made that evening, were all in
attendance. When in the middle of the room the general was invited to
remove his bandage, he did so immediately, and was surprised to see so
many well-known faces in a society of whose existence he had till then
been ignorant. They questioned him as to his sentiments, but he
contented himself with answering, that the letters from the Island of
Elba ought to have informed them'"--

Franz interrupted himself by saying, "My father was a royalist; they
need not have asked his sentiments, which were well known."

"And hence," said Villefort, "arose my affection for your father, my
dear M. Franz. Opinions held in common are a ready bond of union."

"Read again," said the old man. Franz continued:--

"'The president then sought to make him speak more explicitly, but M. de
Quesnel replied that he wished first to know what they wanted with him.
He was then informed of the contents of the letter from the Island of
Elba, in which he was recommended to the club as a man who would be
likely to advance the interests of their party. One paragraph spoke of
the return of Bonaparte and promised another letter and further details,
on the arrival of the _Pharaon_ belonging to the shipbuilder Morrel, of
Marseilles, whose captain was entirely devoted to the emperor. During
all this time, the general, on whom they thought to have relied as on a
brother, manifested evidently signs of discontent and repugnance. When
the reading was finished, he remained silent, with knitted brows.

"'"Well," asked the president, "what do you say to this letter,
general?"

"'"I say that it is too soon after declaring myself for Louis XVIII. to
break my vow in behalf of the ex-emperor." This answer was too clear to
permit of any mistake as to his sentiments. "General," said the
president, "we acknowledge no King Louis XVIII., or an ex-emperor, but
his majesty the emperor and king, driven from France, which is his
kingdom, by violence and treason."

"'"Excuse me, gentlemen," said the general; "you may not acknowledge
Louis XVIII., but I do, as he has made me a baron and a field-marshal,
and I shall never forget that for these two titles I am indebted to his
happy return to France."

"'"Sir," said the president, rising with gravity, "be careful what you
say; your words clearly show us that they are deceived concerning you in
the Island of Elba, and have deceived us! The communication has been
made to you in consequence of the confidence placed in you, and which
does you honor. Now we discover our error; a title and promotion attach
you to the government we wish to overturn. We will not constrain you to
help us; we enroll no one against his conscience, but we will compel you
to act generously, even if you are not disposed to do so."

"'"You would call acting generously, knowing your conspiracy and not
informing against you, that is what I should call becoming your
accomplice. You see I am more candid than you."'"

"Ah, my father!" said Franz, interrupting himself. "I understand now why
they murdered him." Valentine could not help casting one glance towards
the young man, whose filial enthusiasm it was delightful to behold.
Villefort walked to and fro behind them. Noirtier watched the expression
of each one, and preserved his dignified and commanding attitude. Franz
returned to the manuscript, and continued:--

"'"Sir," said the president, "you have been invited to join this
assembly--you were not forced here; it was proposed to you to come
blindfolded--you accepted. When you complied with this twofold request
you well knew we did not wish to secure the throne of Louis XVIII., or
we should not take so much care to avoid the vigilance of the police. It
would be conceding too much to allow you to put on a mask to aid you in
the discovery of our secret, and then to remove it that you may ruin
those who have confided in you. No, no, you must first say if you
declare yourself for the king of a day who now reigns, or for his
majesty the emperor."

"'"I am a royalist," replied the general; "I have taken the oath of
allegiance to Louis XVIII., and I will adhere to it." These words were
followed by a general murmur, and it was evident that several of the
members were discussing the propriety of making the general repent of
his rashness.

"'The president again arose, and having imposed silence, said,--"Sir,
you are too serious and too sensible a man not to understand the
consequences of our present situation, and your candor has already
dictated to us the conditions which remain for us to offer you." The
general, putting his hand on his sword, exclaimed,--"If you talk of
honor, do not begin by disavowing its laws, and impose nothing by
violence."

"'"And you, sir," continued the president, with a calmness still more
terrible than the general's anger, "I advise you not to touch your
sword." The general looked around him with slight uneasiness; however he
did not yield, but calling up all his fortitude, said,--"I will not
swear."

"'"Then you must die," replied the president calmly. M. d'Epinay became
very pale; he looked round him a second time, several members of the
club were whispering, and getting their arms from under their cloaks.
"General," said the president, "do not alarm yourself; you are among men
of honor who will use every means to convince you before resorting to
the last extremity, but as you have said, you are among conspirators,
you are in possession of our secret, and you must restore it to us." A
significant silence followed these words, and as the general did not
reply,--"Close the doors," said the president to the door-keeper.


"'The same deadly silence succeeded these words. Then the general
advanced, and making a violent effort to control his feelings,--"I have
a son," said he, "and I ought to think of him, finding myself among
assassins."

"'"General," said the chief of the assembly, "one man may insult fifty--
it is the privilege of weakness. But he does wrong to use his privilege.
Follow my advice, swear, and do not insult." The general, again daunted
by the superiority of the chief, hesitated a moment; then advancing to
the president's desk,--"What is the form, said he.

"'"It is this:--'I swear by my honor not to reveal to anyone what I have
seen and heard on the 5th of February, 1815, between nine and ten
o'clock in the evening; and I plead guilty of death should I ever
violate this oath.'" The general appeared to be affected by a nervous
tremor, which prevented his answering for some moments; then, overcoming
his manifest repugnance, he pronounced the required oath, but in so low
a tone as to be scarcely audible to the majority of the members, who
insisted on his repeating it clearly and distinctly, which he did.

"'"Now am I at liberty to retire?" said the general. The president rose,
appointed three members to accompany him, and got into the carriage with
the general after bandaging his eyes. One of those three members was the
coachman who had driven them there. The other members silently
dispersed. "Where do you wish to be taken?" asked the president.--
"Anywhere out of your presence," replied M. d'Epinay. "Beware, sir,"
replied the president, "you are no longer in the assembly, and have only
to do with individuals; do not insult them unless you wish to be held
responsible." But instead of listening, M. d'Epinay went on,--"You are
still as brave in your carriage as in your assembly because you are
still four against one." The president stopped the coach. They were at
that part of the Quai des Ormes where the steps lead down to the river.
"Why do you stop here?" asked d'Epinay.

"'"Because, sir," said the president, "you have insulted a man, and that
man will not go one step farther without demanding honorable
reparation."

"'"Another method of assassination?" said the general, shrugging his
shoulders.

"'"Make no noise, sir, unless you wish me to consider you as one of the
men of whom you spoke just now as cowards, who take their weakness for a
shield. You are alone, one alone shall answer you; you have a sword by
your side, I have one in my cane; you have no witness, one of these
gentlemen will serve you. Now, if you please, remove your bandage." The
general tore the handkerchief from his eyes. "At last," said he, "I
shall know with whom I have to do." They opened the door and the four
men alighted.'"

Franz again interrupted himself, and wiped the cold drops from his brow;
there was something awful in hearing the son read aloud in trembling
pallor these details of his father's death, which had hitherto been a
mystery. Valentine clasped her hands as if in prayer. Noirtier looked at
Villefort with an almost sublime expression of contempt and pride. Franz
continued:--

"'It was, as we said, the fifth of February. For three days the mercury
had been five or six degrees below freezing and the steps were covered
with ice. The general was stout and tall, the president offered him the
side of the railing to assist him in getting down. The two witnesses
followed. It was a dark night. The ground from the steps to the river
was covered with snow and hoarfrost, the water of the river looked black
and deep. One of the seconds went for a lantern in a coal-barge near,
and by its light they examined the weapons. The president's sword, which
was simply, as he had said, one he carried in his cane, was five inches
shorter than the general's, and had no guard. The general proposed to
cast lots for the swords, but the president said it was he who had given
the provocation, and when he had given it he had supposed each would use
his own arms. The witnesses endeavored to insist, but the president bade
them be silent. The lantern was placed on the ground, the two
adversaries took their stations, and the duel began. The light made the
two swords appear like flashes of lightning; as for the men, they were
scarcely perceptible, the darkness was so great.


"'General d'Epinay passed for one of the best swordsmen in the army, but
he was pressed so closely in the onset that he missed his aim and fell.
The witnesses thought he was dead, but his adversary, who knew he had
not struck him, offered him the assistance of his hand to rise. The
circumstance irritated instead of calming the general, and he rushed on
his adversary. But his opponent did not allow his guard to be broken. He
