
"Excuse my little subterfuge," said the countess, in reply to her
companion's half-reproachful observation on the subject; "but that
horrid man had made me feel quite uncomfortable, and I longed to be
alone, that I might compose my startled mind." Franz essayed to smile.
"Nay," said she, "do not smile; it ill accords with the expression of
your countenance, and I am sure it does not spring from your heart.
However, promise me one thing."

"What is it?"

"Promise me, I say."

"I will do anything you desire, except relinquish my determination of
finding out who this man is. I have more reasons than you can imagine
for desiring to know who he is, from whence he came, and whither he is
going."

"Where he comes from I am ignorant; but I can readily tell you where he
is going to, and that is down below, without the least doubt."

"Let us only speak of the promise you wished me to make," said Franz.

"Well, then, you must give me your word to return immediately to your
hotel, and make no attempt to follow this man tonight. There are certain
affinities between the persons we quit and those we meet afterwards. For
heaven's sake, do not serve as a conductor between that man and me.
Pursue your chase after him tomorrow as eagerly as you please; but never
bring him near me, if you would not see me die of terror. And now, good-
night; go to your rooms, and try to sleep away all recollections of this
evening. For my own part, I am quite sure I shall not be able to close
my eyes."

So saying, the countess quitted Franz, leaving him unable to decide
whether she were merely amusing herself at his expense, or whether her
fears and agitations were genuine.

Upon his return to the hotel, Franz found Albert in his dressing-gown
and slippers, listlessly extended on a sofa, smoking a cigar. "My dear
fellow." cried he, springing up, "is it really you? Why, I did not
expect to see you before tomorrow."

"My dear Albert," replied Franz, "I am glad of this opportunity to tell
you, once and forever, that you entertain a most erroneous notion
concerning Italian women. I should have thought the continual failures
you have met with in all your own love affairs might have taught you
better by this time."

"Upon my soul, these women would puzzle the very Devil to read them
aright. Why, here--they give you their hand--they press yours in return-
-they keep up a whispering conversation--permit you to accompany them
home. Why, if a Parisian were to indulge in a quarter of these marks of
flattering attention, her reputation would be gone forever."

"And the very reason why the women of this fine country put so little
restraint on their words and actions, is because they live so much in
public, and have really nothing to conceal. Besides, you must have
perceived that the countess was really alarmed."

"At what? At the sight of that respectable gentleman sitting opposite to
us in the same box with the lovely Greek girl? Now, for my part, I met
them in the lobby after the conclusion of the piece; and hang me, if I
can guess where you took your notions of the other world from. I can
assure you that this hobgoblin of yours is a deuced fine-looking fellow-
-admirably dressed. Indeed, I feel quite sure, from the cut of his
clothes, they are made by a first-rate Paris tailor--probably Blin or
Humann. He was rather too pale, certainly; but then, you know, paleness
is always looked upon as a strong proof of aristocratic descent and
distinguished breeding." Franz smiled; for he well remembered that
Albert particularly prided himself on the entire absence of color in his
own complexion.

"Well, that tends to confirm my own ideas," said Franz, "that the
countess's suspicions were destitute alike of sense and reason. Did he
speak in your hearing? and did you catch any of his words?"

"I did; but they were uttered in the Romaic dialect. I knew that from
the mixture of Greek words. I don't know whether I ever told you that
when I was at college I was rather--rather strong in Greek."

"He spoke the Romaic language, did he?"

"I think so."

"That settles it," murmured Franz. "'Tis he, past all doubt."

"What do you say?"

"Nothing, nothing. But tell me, what were you thinking about when I came
in?"

"Oh, I was arranging a little surprise for you."

"Indeed. Of what nature?"

"Why, you know it is quite impossible to procure a carriage."

"Certainly; and I also know that we have done all that human means
afforded to endeavor to get one."

"Now, then, in this difficulty a bright idea has flashed across my
brain." Franz looked at Albert as though he had not much confidence in
the suggestions of his imagination. "I tell you what, Sir Franz," cried
Albert, "you deserve to be called out for such a misgiving and
incredulous glance as that you were pleased to bestow on me just now."

"And I promise to give you the satisfaction of a gentleman if your
scheme turns out as ingenious as you assert."

"Well, then, hearken to me."

"I listen."

"You agree, do you not, that obtaining a carriage is out of the
question?"

"I do."

"Neither can we procure horses?"

"True; we have offered any sum, but have failed."

"Well, now, what do you say to a cart? I dare say such a thing might be
had."

"Very possibly."

"And a pair of oxen?"

"As easily found as the cart."

"Then you see, my good fellow, with a cart and a couple of oxen our
business can be managed. The cart must be tastefully ornamented; and if
you and I dress ourselves as Neapolitan reapers, we may get up a
striking tableau, after the manner of that splendid picture by Leopold
Robert. It would add greatly to the effect if the countess would join us
in the costume of a peasant from Puzzoli or Sorrento. Our group would
then be quite complete, more especially as the countess is quite
beautiful enough to represent a madonna."

"Well," said Franz, "this time, M. Albert, I am bound to give you credit
for having hit upon a most capital idea."

"And quite a national one, too," replied Albert with gratified pride. "A
mere masque borrowed from our own festivities. Ha, ha, ye Romans! you
thought to make us, unhappy strangers, trot at the heels of your
processions, like so many lazzaroni, because no carriages or horses are
to be had in your beggarly city. But you don't know us; when we can't
have one thing we invent another."

"And have you communicated your triumphant idea to anybody?"

"Only to our host. Upon my return home I sent for him, and I then
explained to him what I wished to procure. He assured me that nothing
would be easier than to furnish all I desired. One thing I was sorry
for; when I bade him have the horns of the oxen gilded, he told me there
would not be time, as it would require three days to do that; so you see
we must do without this little superfluity."

"And where is he now?"

"Who?"

"Our host."

"Gone out in search of our equipage, by tomorrow it might be too late."

"Then he will be able to give us an answer tonight."

"Oh, I expect him every minute." At this instant the door opened, and
the head of Signor Pastrini appeared. "_Permesso_?" inquired he.

"Certainly--certainly," cried Franz. "Come in, my host."

"Now, then," asked Albert eagerly, "have you found the desired cart and
oxen?"

"Better than that!" replied Signor Pastrini, with the air of a man
perfectly well satisfied with himself.

"Take care, my worthy host," said Albert, "_better_ is a sure enemy to
_well_."

"Let your excellencies only leave the matter to me," returned Signor
Pastrini in a tone indicative of unbounded self-confidence.

"But what _have_ you done?" asked Franz. "Speak out, there's a worthy
fellow."

"Your excellencies are aware," responded the landlord, swelling with
importance, "that the Count of Monte Cristo is living on the same floor
with yourselves!"

"I should think we did know it," exclaimed Albert, "since it is owing to
that circumstance that we are packed into these small rooms, like two
poor students in the back streets of Paris."

"When, then, the Count of Monte Cristo, hearing of the dilemma in which
you are placed, has sent to offer you seats in his carriage and two
places at his windows in the Palazzo Rospoli." The friends looked at
