advanced to meet him with a sad, though affable smile. "Well," said he,
extending his hand to Monte Cristo, "I suppose you have come to
sympathize with me, for indeed misfortune has taken possession of my
house. When I perceived you, I was just asking myself whether I had not
wished harm towards those poor Morcerfs, which would have justified the
proverb of 'He who wishes misfortunes to happen to others experiences
them himself.' Well, on my word of honor, I answered, 'No!' I wished no
ill to Morcerf; he was a little proud, perhaps, for a man who like
myself has risen from nothing; but we all have our faults. Do you know,
count, that persons of our time of life--not that you belong to the
class, you are still a young man,--but as I was saying, persons of our
time of life have been very unfortunate this year. For example, look at
the puritanical procureur, who has just lost his daughter, and in fact
nearly all his family, in so singular a manner; Morcerf dishonored and
dead; and then myself covered with ridicule through the villany of
Benedetto; besides----"

"Besides what?" asked the Count.

"Alas, do you not know?"

"What new calamity?"

"My daughter----"

"Mademoiselle Danglars?"

"Eugénie has left us!"

"Good heavens, what are you telling me?"

"The truth, my dear count. Oh, how happy you must be in not having
either wife or children!"

"Do you think so?"

"Indeed I do."

"And so Mademoiselle Danglars----"

"She could not endure the insult offered to us by that wretch, so she
asked permission to travel."

"And is she gone?"

"The other night she left."

"With Madame Danglars?"

"No, with a relation. But still, we have quite lost our dear Eugénie;
for I doubt whether her pride will ever allow her to return to France."

"Still, baron," said Monte Cristo, "family griefs, or indeed any other
affliction which would crush a man whose child was his only treasure,
are endurable to a millionaire. Philosophers may well say, and practical
men will always support the opinion, that money mitigates many trials;
and if you admit the efficacy of this sovereign balm, you ought to be
very easily consoled--you, the king of finance, the focus of
immeasurable power."

Danglars looked at him askance, as though to ascertain whether he spoke
seriously. "Yes," he answered, "if a fortune brings consolation, I ought
to be consoled; I am rich."

"So rich, dear sir, that your fortune resembles the pyramids; if you
wished to demolish them you could not, and if it were possible, you
would not dare!" Danglars smiled at the good-natured pleasantry of the
count. "That reminds me," he said, "that when you entered I was on the
point of signing five little bonds; I have already signed two: will you
allow me to do the same to the others?"

"Pray do so."

There was a moment's silence, during which the noise of the banker's pen
was alone heard, while Monte Cristo examined the gilt mouldings on the
ceiling. "Are they Spanish, Haitian, or Neapolitan bonds?" said Monte
Cristo. "No," said Danglars, smiling, "they are bonds on the bank of
France, payable to bearer. Stay, count," he added, "you, who may be
called the emperor, if I claim the title of king of finance, have you
many pieces of paper of this size, each worth a million?" The count took
into his hands the papers, which Danglars had so proudly presented to
him, and read:--

"To the Governor of the Bank. Please pay to my order, from the fund
deposited by me, the sum of a million, and charge the same to my
account.

"Baron Danglars."

"One, two, three, four, five," said Monte Cristo; "five millions--why
what a Crœsus you are!"

"This is how I transact business," said Danglars.

"It is really wonderful," said the count; "above all, if, as I suppose,
it is payable at sight."

"It is, indeed, said Danglars.

"It is a fine thing to have such credit; really, it is only in France
these things are done. Five millions on five little scraps of paper!--it
must be seen to be believed."

"You do not doubt it?"

"No!"

"You say so with an accent--stay, you shall be convinced; take my clerk
to the bank, and you will see him leave it with an order on the Treasury
for the same sum."

"No," said Monte Cristo folding the five notes, "most decidedly not; the
thing is so curious, I will make the experiment myself. I am credited on
you for six millions. I have drawn nine hundred thousand francs, you
therefore still owe me five millions and a hundred thousand francs. I
will take the five scraps of paper that I now hold as bonds, with your
signature alone, and here is a receipt in full for the six millions
between us. I had prepared it beforehand, for I am much in want of money
today." And Monte Cristo placed the bonds in his pocket with one hand,
while with the other he held out the receipt to Danglars. If a
thunderbolt had fallen at the banker's feet, he could not have
experienced greater terror.

"What," he stammered, "do you mean to keep that money? Excuse me, excuse
me, but I owe this money to the charity fund,--a deposit which I
promised to pay this morning."

"Oh, well, then," said Monte Cristo, "I am not particular about these
five notes, pay me in a different form; I wished, from curiosity, to
take these, that I might be able to say that without any advice or
preparation the house of Danglars had paid me five millions without a
minute's delay; it would have been remarkable. But here are your bonds;
pay me differently;" and he held the bonds towards Danglars, who seized
them like a vulture extending its claws to withhold the food that is
being wrested from its grasp. Suddenly he rallied, made a violent effort
to restrain himself, and then a smile gradually widened the features of
his disturbed countenance.


"Certainly," he said, "your receipt is money."

"Oh dear, yes; and if you were at Rome, the house of Thomson & French
would make no more difficulty about paying the money on my receipt than
you have just done."

"Pardon me, count, pardon me."

"Then I may keep this money?"

"Yes," said Danglars, while the perspiration started from the roots of
his hair. "Yes, keep it--keep it."

Monte Cristo replaced the notes in his pocket with that indescribable
expression which seemed to say, "Come, reflect; if you repent there is
still time."

"No," said Danglars, "no, decidedly no; keep my signatures. But you know
none are so formal as bankers in transacting business; I intended this
money for the charity fund, and I seemed to be robbing them if I did not
pay them with these precise bonds. How absurd--as if one crown were not
as good as another. Excuse me;" and he began to laugh loudly, but
nervously.

"Certainly, I excuse you," said Monte Cristo graciously, "and pocket
them." And he placed the bonds in his pocket-book.

"But," said Danglars, "there is still a sum of one hundred thousand
francs?"

"Oh, a mere nothing," said Monte Cristo. "The balance would come to
about that sum; but keep it, and we shall be quits."

"Count," said Danglars, "are you speaking seriously?"

"I never joke with bankers," said Monte Cristo in a freezing manner,
which repelled impertinence; and he turned to the door, just as the
valet de chambre announced,--"M. de Boville, receiver-general of the
charities."

"_Ma foi_," said Monte Cristo; "I think I arrived just in time to obtain
your signatures, or they would have been disputed with me."

Danglars again became pale, and hastened to conduct the count out. Monte
Cristo exchanged a ceremonious bow with M. de Boville, who was standing
in the waiting-room, and who was introduced into Danglars' room as soon
as the count had left. The count's sad face was illumined by a faint
smile, as he noticed the portfolio which the receiver-general held in
his hand. At the door he found his carriage, and was immediately driven
to the bank. Meanwhile Danglars, repressing all emotion, advanced to
meet the receiver-general. We need not say that a smile of condescension
was stamped upon his lips. "Good-morning, creditor," said he; "for I
wager anything it is the creditor who visits me."

"You are right, baron," answered M. de Boville; "the charities present
themselves to you through me: the widows and orphans depute me to
receive alms to the amount of five millions from you."

"And yet they say orphans are to be pitied," said Danglars, wishing to
prolong the jest. "Poor things!"

