"I will come directly," cried Valentine aloud. The name of Monte Cristo
sent an electric shock through the young man on the other side of the
iron gate, to whom Valentine's _"I am coming"_ was the customary signal
of farewell. "Now, then," said Maximilian, leaning on the handle of his
spade, "I would give a good deal to know how it comes about that the
Count of Monte Cristo is acquainted with M. de Villefort."



Chapter 52. Toxicology

It was really the Count of Monte Cristo who had just arrived at Madame
de Villefort's for the purpose of returning the procureur's visit, and
at his name, as may be easily imagined, the whole house was in
confusion. Madame de Villefort, who was alone in her drawing-room when
the count was announced, desired that her son might be brought thither
instantly to renew his thanks to the count; and Edward, who heard this
great personage talked of for two whole days, made all possible haste to
come to him, not from obedience to his mother, or out of any feeling of
gratitude to the count, but from sheer curiosity, and that some chance
remark might give him the opportunity for making one of the impertinent
speeches which made his mother say,--"Oh, that naughty child! But I
can't be severe with him, he is really _so_ bright."

After the usual civilities, the count inquired after M. de Villefort.
"My husband dines with the chancellor," replied the young lady; "he has
just gone, and I am sure he'll be exceedingly sorry not to have had the
pleasure of seeing you before he went." Two visitors who were there when
the count arrived, having gazed at him with all their eyes, retired
after that reasonable delay which politeness admits and curiosity
requires. "What is your sister Valentine doing?" inquired Madame de
Villefort of Edward; "tell someone to bid her come here, that I may have
the honor of introducing her to the count."

"You have a daughter, then, madame?" inquired the count; "very young, I
presume?"

"The daughter of M. de Villefort by his first marriage," replied the
young wife, "a fine well-grown girl."

"But melancholy," interrupted Master Edward, snatching the feathers out
of the tail of a splendid paroquet that was screaming on its gilded
perch, in order to make a plume for his hat. Madame de Villefort merely
cried,--"Be still, Edward!" She then added,--"This young madcap is,
however, very nearly right, and merely re-echoes what he has heard me
say with pain a hundred times; for Mademoiselle de Villefort is, in
spite of all we can do to rouse her, of a melancholy disposition and
taciturn habit, which frequently injure the effect of her beauty. But
what detains her? Go, Edward, and see."

"Because they are looking for her where she is not to be found."

"And where are they looking for her?"

"With grandpapa Noirtier."

"And do you think she is not there?"

"No, no, no, no, no, she is not there," replied Edward, singing his
words.

"And where is she, then? If you know, why don't you tell?"

"She is under the big chestnut-tree," replied the spoiled brat, as he
gave, in spite of his mother's commands, live flies to the parrot, which
seemed keenly to relish such fare. Madame de Villefort stretched out her
hand to ring, intending to direct her waiting-maid to the spot where she
would find Valentine, when the young lady herself entered the apartment.
She appeared much dejected; and any person who considered her
attentively might have observed the traces of recent tears in her eyes.

Valentine, whom we have in the rapid march of our narrative presented to
our readers without formally introducing her, was a tall and graceful
girl of nineteen, with bright chestnut hair, deep blue eyes, and that
reposeful air of quiet distinction which characterized her mother. Her
white and slender fingers, her pearly neck, her cheeks tinted with
varying hues reminded one of the lovely Englishwomen who have been so
poetically compared in their manner to the gracefulness of a swan. She
entered the apartment, and seeing near her stepmother the stranger of
whom she had already heard so much, saluted him without any girlish
awkwardness, or even lowering her eyes, and with an elegance that
redoubled the count's attention. He rose to return the salutation.
"Mademoiselle de Villefort, my step-daughter," said Madame de Villefort
to Monte Cristo, leaning back on her sofa and motioning towards
Valentine with her hand. "And M. de Monte Cristo, King of China, Emperor
of Cochin-China," said the young imp, looking slyly towards his sister.

Madame de Villefort at this really did turn pale, and was very nearly
angry with this household plague, who answered to the name of Edward;
but the count, on the contrary, smiled, and appeared to look at the boy
complacently, which caused the maternal heart to bound again with joy
and enthusiasm.

"But, madame," replied the count, continuing the conversation, and
looking by turns at Madame de Villefort and Valentine, "have I not
already had the honor of meeting yourself and mademoiselle before? I
could not help thinking so just now; the idea came over my mind, and as
mademoiselle entered the sight of her was an additional ray of light
thrown on a confused remembrance; excuse the remark."

"I do not think it likely, sir; Mademoiselle de Villefort is not very
fond of society, and we very seldom go out," said the young lady.

"Then it was not in society that I met with mademoiselle or yourself,
madame, or this charming little merry boy. Besides, the Parisian world
is entirely unknown to me, for, as I believe I told you, I have been in
Paris but very few days. No,--but, perhaps, you will permit me to call
to mind--stay!" The Count placed his hand on his brow as if to collect
his thoughts. "No--it was somewhere--away from here--it was--I do not
know--but it appears that this recollection is connected with a lovely
sky and some religious _fête_; mademoiselle was holding flowers in her
hand, the interesting boy was chasing a beautiful peacock in a garden,
and you, madame, were under the trellis of some arbor. Pray come to my
aid, madame; do not these circumstances appeal to your memory?"

"No, indeed," replied Madame de Villefort; "and yet it appears to me,
sir, that if I had met you anywhere, the recollection of you must have
been imprinted on my memory."

"Perhaps the count saw us in Italy," said Valentine timidly.

"Yes, in Italy; it was in Italy most probably," replied Monte Cristo;
"you have travelled then in Italy, mademoiselle?"

"Yes; madame and I were there two years ago. The doctors, anxious for my
lungs, had prescribed the air of Naples. We went by Bologna, Perugia,
and Rome."

"Ah, yes--true, mademoiselle," exclaimed Monte Cristo as if this simple
explanation was sufficient to revive the recollection he sought. "It was
at Perugia on Corpus Christi Day, in the garden of the Hôtel des Postes,
when chance brought us together; you, Madame de Villefort, and her son;
I now remember having had the honor of meeting you."

"I perfectly well remember Perugia, sir, and the Hôtel des Postes, and
the festival of which you speak," said Madame de Villefort, "but in vain
do I tax my memory, of whose treachery I am ashamed, for I really do not
recall to mind that I ever had the pleasure of seeing you before."

"It is strange, but neither do I recollect meeting with you," observed
Valentine, raising her beautiful eyes to the count.

"But I remember it perfectly," interposed the darling Edward.


"I will assist your memory, madame," continued the count; "the day had
been burning hot; you were waiting for horses, which were delayed in
consequence of the festival. Mademoiselle was walking in the shade of
the garden, and your son disappeared in pursuit of the peacock."

"And I caught it, mamma, don't you remember?" interposed Edward, "and I
pulled three such beautiful feathers out of his tail."

"You, madame, remained under the arbor; do you not remember, that while
you were seated on a stone bench, and while, as I told you, Mademoiselle
de Villefort and your young son were absent, you conversed for a
considerable time with somebody?"

"Yes, in truth, yes," answered the young lady, turning very red, "I do
remember conversing with a person wrapped in a long woollen mantle; he
was a medical man, I think."

"Precisely so, madame; this man was myself; for a fortnight I had been
at that hotel, during which period I had cured my valet de chambre of a
fever, and my landlord of the jaundice, so that I really acquired a
reputation as a skilful physician. We discoursed a long time, madame, on
different subjects; of Perugino, of Raphael, of manners, customs, of the
famous _aqua Tofana_, of which they had told you, I think you said, that
certain individuals in Perugia had preserved the secret."

"Yes, true," replied Madame de Villefort, somewhat uneasily, "I remember
now."

"I do not recollect now all the various subjects of which we discoursed,
madame," continued the count with perfect calmness; "but I perfectly
remember that, falling into the error which others had entertained
respecting me, you consulted me as to the health of Mademoiselle de
Villefort."

"Yes, really, sir, you were in fact a medical man," said Madame de
Villefort, "since you had cured the sick."

"Molière or Beaumarchais would reply to you, madame, that it was
precisely because I was not, that I had cured my patients; for myself, I
am content to say to you that I have studied chemistry and the natural
sciences somewhat deeply, but still only as an amateur, you
understand."--At this moment the clock struck six. "It is six o'clock,"
said Madame de Villefort, evidently agitated. "Valentine, will you not
go and see if your grandpapa will have his dinner?" Valentine rose, and
saluting the count, left the apartment without speaking.

"Oh, madame," said the count, when Valentine had left the room, "was it
on my account that you sent Mademoiselle de Villefort away?"

"By no means," replied the young lady quickly; "but this is the hour
when we usually give M. Noirtier the unwelcome meal that sustains his
pitiful existence. You are aware, sir, of the deplorable condition of my
husband's father?"

"Yes, madame, M. de Villefort spoke of it to me--a paralysis, I think."
