"Oh, yes."

"And from whose hands the count extricated me in so wonderful a manner?"

"To be sure, I remember it all now."

"He called himself Vampa. You see, it's evident where the count got the
name."

"But what could have been his motive for sending the cup to me?"

"In the first place, because I had spoken much of you to him, as you may
believe; and in the second, because he delighted to see a countrywoman
take so lively an interest in his success."

"I trust and hope you never repeated to the count all the foolish
remarks we used to make about him?"

"I should not like to affirm upon oath that I have not. Besides, his
presenting you the cup under the name of Lord Ruthven----"

"Oh, but that is dreadful! Why, the man must owe me a fearful grudge."

"Does his action appear like that of an enemy?"

"No; certainly not."

"Well, then----"

"And so he is in Paris?"

"Yes."

"And what effect does he produce?"

"Why," said Albert, "he was talked about for a week; then the coronation
of the queen of England took place, followed by the theft of
Mademoiselle Mars's diamonds; and so people talked of something else."

"My good fellow," said Château-Renaud, "the count is your friend and you
treat him accordingly. Do not believe what Albert is telling you,
countess; so far from the sensation excited in the Parisian circles by
the appearance of the Count of Monte Cristo having abated, I take upon
myself to declare that it is as strong as ever. His first astounding act
upon coming amongst us was to present a pair of horses, worth 32,000
francs, to Madame Danglars; his second, the almost miraculous
preservation of Madame de Villefort's life; now it seems that he has
carried off the prize awarded by the Jockey Club. I therefore maintain,
in spite of Morcerf, that not only is the count the object of interest
at this present moment, but also that he will continue to be so for a
month longer if he pleases to exhibit an eccentricity of conduct which,
after all, may be his ordinary mode of existence."

"Perhaps you are right," said Morcerf; "meanwhile, who is in the Russian
ambassador's box?"

"Which box do you mean?" asked the countess.

"The one between the pillars on the first tier--it seems to have been
fitted up entirely afresh."

"Did you observe anyone during the first act?" asked Château-Renaud.

"Where?"

"In that box."

"No," replied the countess, "it was certainly empty during the first
act;" then, resuming the subject of their previous conversation, she
said, "And so you really believe it was your mysterious Count of Monte
Cristo that gained the prize?"

"I am sure of it."

"And who afterwards sent the cup to me?"

"Undoubtedly."

"But I don't know him," said the countess; "I have a great mind to
return it."

"Do no such thing, I beg of you; he would only send you another, formed
of a magnificent sapphire, or hollowed out of a gigantic ruby. It is his
way, and you must take him as you find him." At this moment the bell
rang to announce the drawing up of the curtain for the second act.
Albert rose to return to his place. "Shall I see you again?" asked the
countess. "At the end of the next act, with your permission, I will come
and inquire whether there is anything I can do for you in Paris?"

"Pray take notice," said the countess, "that my present residence is 22
Rue de Rivoli, and that I am at home to my friends every Saturday
evening. So now, you are both forewarned." The young men bowed, and
quitted the box. Upon reaching their stalls, they found the whole of the
audience in the parterre standing up and directing their gaze towards
the box formerly possessed by the Russian ambassador. A man of from
thirty-five to forty years of age, dressed in deep black, had just
entered, accompanied by a young woman dressed after the Eastern style.
The lady was surpassingly beautiful, while the rich magnificence of her
attire drew all eyes upon her. "Hullo," said Albert; "it is Monte Cristo
and his Greek!"

The strangers were, indeed, no other than the count and Haydée. In a few
moments the young girl had attracted the attention of the whole house,
and even the occupants of the boxes leaned forward to scrutinize her
magnificent diamonds. The second act passed away during one continued
buzz of voices--one deep whisper--intimating that some great and
universally interesting event had occurred; all eyes, all thoughts, were
occupied with the young and beautiful woman, whose gorgeous apparel and
splendid jewels made a most extraordinary spectacle. Upon this occasion
an unmistakable sign from Madame Danglars intimated her desire to see
Albert in her box directly the curtain fell on the second act, and
neither the politeness nor good taste of Morcerf would permit his
neglecting an invitation so unequivocally given. At the close of the act
he therefore went to the baroness. Having bowed to the two ladies, he
extended his hand to Debray. By the baroness he was most graciously
welcomed, while Eugénie received him with her accustomed coldness.

"My dear fellow," said Debray, "you have come in the nick of time. There
is madame overwhelming me with questions respecting the count; she
insists upon it that I can tell her his birth, education, and parentage,
where he came from, and whither he is going. Being no disciple of
Cagliostro, I was wholly unable to do this; so, by way of getting out of
the scrape, I said, 'Ask Morcerf; he has got the whole history of his
beloved Monte Cristo at his fingers' ends;' whereupon the baroness
signified her desire to see you."

"Is it not almost incredible," said Madame Danglars, "that a person
having at least half a million of secret-service money at his command,
should possess so little information?"

"Let me assure you, madame," said Lucien, "that had I really the sum you
mention at my disposal, I would employ it more profitably than in
troubling myself to obtain particulars respecting the Count of Monte
Cristo, whose only merit in my eyes consists in his being twice as rich
as a nabob. However, I have turned the business over to Morcerf, so pray
settle it with him as may be most agreeable to you; for my own part, I
care nothing about the count or his mysterious doings."


"I am very sure no nabob would have sent me a pair of horses worth
32,000 francs, wearing on their heads four diamonds valued at 5,000
francs each."

"He seems to have a mania for diamonds," said Morcerf, smiling, "and I
verily believe that, like Potemkin, he keeps his pockets filled, for the
sake of strewing them along the road, as Tom Thumb did his flint
stones."

"Perhaps he has discovered some mine," said Madame Danglars. "I suppose
you know he has an order for unlimited credit on the baron's banking
establishment?"

"I was not aware of it," replied Albert, "but I can readily believe it."

"And, further, that he stated to M. Danglars his intention of only
staying a year in Paris, during which time he proposed to spend six
millions.

"He must be the Shah of Persia, travelling _incog_."

"Have you noticed the remarkable beauty of the young woman, M. Lucien?"
inquired Eugénie.

"I really never met with one woman so ready to do justice to the charms
of another as yourself," responded Lucien, raising his lorgnette to his
eye. "A most lovely creature, upon my soul!" was his verdict.

"Who is this young person, M. de Morcerf?" inquired Eugénie; "does
anybody know?"

"Mademoiselle," said Albert, replying to this direct appeal, "I can give
you very exact information on that subject, as well as on most points
relative to the mysterious person of whom we are now conversing--the
young woman is a Greek."

"So I should suppose by her dress; if you know no more than that,
everyone here is as well-informed as yourself."

"I am extremely sorry you find me so ignorant a _cicerone_," replied
Morcerf, "but I am reluctantly obliged to confess, I have nothing
further to communicate--yes, stay, I do know one thing more, namely,
that she is a musician, for one day when I chanced to be breakfasting
with the count, I heard the sound of a guzla--it is impossible that it
could have been touched by any other finger than her own."

"Then your count entertains visitors, does he?" asked Madame Danglars.

"Indeed he does, and in a most lavish manner, I can assure you."

"I must try and persuade M. Danglars to invite him to a ball or dinner,
or something of the sort, that he may be compelled to ask us in return."

"What," said Debray, laughing; "do you really mean you would go to his
house?"

"Why not? my husband could accompany me."

"But do you know this mysterious count is a bachelor?"

"You have ample proof to the contrary, if you look opposite," said the
