seldom allowed remarks of this kind to pass unnoticed, but, to the
surprise of the young people, she pretended not to hear it, and said
nothing. Monte Cristo smiled at her unusual humility, and showed her two
immense porcelain jars, over which wound marine plants, of a size and
delicacy that nature alone could produce. The baroness was astonished.
"Why," said she, "you could plant one of the chestnut-trees in the
Tuileries inside! How can such enormous jars have been manufactured?"

"Ah, madame," replied Monte Cristo, "you must not ask of us, the
manufacturers of fine porcelain, such a question. It is the work of
another age, constructed by the genii of earth and water."

"How so?--at what period can that have been?"

"I do not know; I have only heard that an emperor of China had an oven
built expressly, and that in this oven twelve jars like this were
successively baked. Two broke, from the heat of the fire; the other ten
were sunk three hundred fathoms deep into the sea. The sea, knowing what
was required of her, threw over them her weeds, encircled them with
coral, and encrusted them with shells; the whole was cemented by two
hundred years beneath these almost impervious depths, for a revolution
carried away the emperor who wished to make the trial, and only left the
documents proving the manufacture of the jars and their descent into the
sea. At the end of two hundred years the documents were found, and they
thought of bringing up the jars. Divers descended in machines, made
expressly on the discovery, into the bay where they were thrown; but of
ten three only remained, the rest having been broken by the waves. I am
fond of these jars, upon which, perhaps, misshapen, frightful monsters
have fixed their cold, dull eyes, and in which myriads of small fish
have slept, seeking a refuge from the pursuit of their enemies."
Meanwhile, Danglars, who had cared little for curiosities, was
mechanically tearing off the blossoms of a splendid orange-tree, one
after another. When he had finished with the orange-tree, he began at
the cactus; but this, not being so easily plucked as the orange-tree,
pricked him dreadfully. He shuddered, and rubbed his eyes as though
awaking from a dream.

"Sir," said Monte Cristo to him, "I do not recommend my pictures to you,
who possess such splendid paintings; but, nevertheless, here are two by
Hobbema, a Paul Potter, a Mieris, two by Gerard Douw, a Raphael, a Van
Dyck, a Zurbaran, and two or three by Murillo, worth looking at."

"Stay," said Debray; "I recognize this Hobbema."

"Ah, indeed!"

"Yes; it was proposed for the Museum."

"Which, I believe, does not contain one?" said Monte Cristo.

"No; and yet they refused to buy it."

"Why?" said Château-Renaud.

"You pretend not to know,--because government was not rich enough."

"Ah, pardon me," said Château-Renaud; "I have heard of these things
every day during the last eight years, and I cannot understand them
yet."

"You will, by and by," said Debray.

"I think not," replied Château-Renaud.

"Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti and Count Andrea Cavalcanti," announced
Baptistin. A black satin stock, fresh from the maker's hands, gray
moustaches, a bold eye, a major's uniform, ornamented with three medals
and five crosses--in fact, the thorough bearing of an old soldier--such
was the appearance of Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti, that tender father
with whom we are already acquainted. Close to him, dressed in entirely
new clothes, advanced smilingly Count Andrea Cavalcanti, the dutiful
son, whom we also know. The three young people were talking together. On
the entrance of the new-comers, their eyes glanced from father to son,
and then, naturally enough, rested on the latter, whom they began
criticising. "Cavalcanti!" said Debray. "A fine name," said Morrel.

"Yes," said Château-Renaud, "these Italians are well named and badly
dressed."

"You are fastidious, Château-Renaud," replied Debray; "those clothes are
well cut and quite new."

"That is just what I find fault with. That gentleman appears to be well
dressed for the first time in his life."

"Who are those gentlemen?" asked Danglars of Monte Cristo.

"You heard--Cavalcanti."

"That tells me their name, and nothing else."

"Ah, true. You do not know the Italian nobility; the Cavalcanti are all
descended from princes."

"Have they any fortune?"

"An enormous one."

"What do they do?"

"Try to spend it all. They have some business with you, I think, from
what they told me the day before yesterday. I, indeed, invited them here
today on your account. I will introduce you to them."

"But they appear to speak French with a very pure accent," said
Danglars.

"The son has been educated in a college in the south; I believe near
Marseilles. You will find him quite enthusiastic."

"Upon what subject?" asked Madame Danglars.

"The French ladies, madame. He has made up his mind to take a wife from
Paris."

"A fine idea that of his," said Danglars, shrugging his shoulders.
Madame Danglars looked at her husband with an expression which, at any
other time, would have indicated a storm, but for the second time she
controlled herself. "The baron appears thoughtful today," said Monte
Cristo to her; "are they going to put him in the ministry?"

"Not yet, I think. More likely he has been speculating on the Bourse,
and has lost money."

"M. and Madame de Villefort," cried Baptistin. They entered. M. de
Villefort, notwithstanding his self-control, was visibly affected, and
when Monte Cristo touched his hand, he felt it tremble. "Certainly,
women alone know how to dissimulate," said Monte Cristo to himself,
glancing at Madame Danglars, who was smiling on the procureur, and
embracing his wife. After a short time, the count saw Bertuccio, who,
until then, had been occupied on the other side of the house, glide into
an adjoining room. He went to him. "What do you want, M. Bertuccio?"
said he.

"Your excellency has not stated the number of guests."

"Ah, true."

"How many covers?"

"Count for yourself."

"Is everyone here, your excellency?"

"Yes."

Bertuccio glanced through the door, which was ajar. The count watched
him. "Good heavens!" he exclaimed.

"What is the matter?" said the count.

"That woman--that woman!"

"Which?"

"The one with a white dress and so many diamonds--the fair one."

"Madame Danglars?"

"I do not know her name; but it is she, sir, it is she!"

"Whom do you mean?"

"The woman of the garden!--she that was _enciente_--she who was walking
while she waited for----"

Bertuccio stood at the open door, with his eyes starting and his hair on
end.

"Waiting for whom?" Bertuccio, without answering, pointed to Villefort
with something of the gesture Macbeth uses to point out Banquo. "Oh,
oh," he at length muttered, "do you see?"

"What? Who?"

"Him!"

"Him!--M. de Villefort, the king's attorney? Certainly I see him."

"Then I did not kill him?"

"Really, I think you are going mad, good Bertuccio," said the count.

"Then he is not dead?"


"No; you see plainly he is not dead. Instead of striking between the
sixth and seventh left ribs, as your countrymen do, you must have struck
higher or lower, and life is very tenacious in these lawyers, or rather
there is no truth in anything you have told me--it was a fright of the
imagination, a dream of your fancy. You went to sleep full of thoughts
of vengeance; they weighed heavily upon your stomach; you had the
nightmare--that's all. Come, calm yourself, and reckon them up--M. and
Madame de Villefort, two; M. and Madame Danglars, four; M. de Château-
Renaud, M. Debray, M. Morrel, seven; Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti,
eight."

"Eight!" repeated Bertuccio.

"Stop! You are in a shocking hurry to be off--you forget one of my
