fellow. He drew up for a minute, threw a rapid glance around him, and
then his hand fell instantly into his pocket, where it began playing
with a pistol. But, meanwhile, Caderousse, who had never taken his eyes
off his companion, passed his hand behind his back, and opened a long
Spanish knife, which he always carried with him, to be ready in case of
need. The two friends, as we see, were worthy of and understood one
another. Andrea's hand left his pocket inoffensively, and was carried up
to the red moustache, which it played with for some time. "Good
Caderousse," he said, "how happy you will be."

"I will do my best," said the innkeeper of the Pont du Gard, shutting up
his knife.

"Well, then, we will go into Paris. But how will you pass through the
barrier without exciting suspicion? It seems to me that you are in more
danger riding than on foot."

"Wait," said Caderousse, "we shall see." He then took the great-coat
with the large collar, which the groom had left behind in the tilbury,
and put it on his back; then he took off Cavalcanti's hat, which he
placed upon his own head, and finally he assumed the careless attitude
of a servant whose master drives himself.

"But, tell me," said Andrea, "am I to remain bareheaded?"

"Pooh," said Caderousse; "it is so windy that your hat can easily appear
to have blown off."

"Come, come; enough of this," said Cavalcanti.

"What are you waiting for?" said Caderousse. "I hope I am not the
cause."

"Hush," said Andrea. They passed the barrier without accident. At the
first cross street Andrea stopped his horse, and Caderousse leaped out.

"Well!" said Andrea,--"my servant's coat and my hat?"

"Ah," said Caderousse, "you would not like me to risk taking cold?"

"But what am I to do?"

"You? Oh, you are young while I am beginning to get old. _Au revoir_,
Benedetto;" and running into a court, he disappeared.

"Alas," said Andrea, sighing, "one cannot be completely happy in this
world!"



Chapter 65. A Conjugal Scene

At the Place Louis XV. the three young people separated--that is to say,
Morrel went to the Boulevards, Château-Renaud to the Pont de la
Révolution, and Debray to the Quai. Most probably Morrel and Château-
Renaud returned to their "domestic hearths," as they say in the gallery
of the Chamber in well-turned speeches, and in the theatre of the Rue
Richelieu in well-written pieces; but it was not the case with Debray.
When he reached the wicket of the Louvre, he turned to the left,
galloped across the Carrousel, passed through the Rue Saint-Roch, and,
issuing from the Rue de la Michodière, he arrived at M. Danglars' door
just at the same time that Villefort's landau, after having deposited
him and his wife at the Faubourg Saint-Honoré, stopped to leave the
baroness at her own house. Debray, with the air of a man familiar with
the house, entered first into the court, threw his bridle into the hands
of a footman, and returned to the door to receive Madame Danglars, to
whom he offered his arm, to conduct her to her apartments. The gate once
closed, and Debray and the baroness alone in the court, he asked,--"What
was the matter with you, Hermine? and why were you so affected at that
story, or rather fable, which the count related?"

"Because I have been in such shocking spirits all the evening, my
friend," said the baroness.

"No, Hermine," replied Debray; "you cannot make me believe that; on the
contrary, you were in excellent spirits when you arrived at the count's.
M. Danglars was disagreeable, certainly, but I know how much you care
for his ill-humor. Someone has vexed you; I will allow no one to annoy
you."

"You are deceived, Lucien, I assure you," replied Madame Danglars; "and
what I have told you is really the case, added to the ill-humor you
remarked, but which I did not think it worth while to allude to." It was
evident that Madame Danglars was suffering from that nervous
irritability which women frequently cannot account for even to
themselves; or that, as Debray had guessed, she had experienced some
secret agitation that she would not acknowledge to anyone. Being a man
who knew that the former of these symptoms was one of the inherent
penalties of womanhood, he did not then press his inquiries, but waited
for a more appropriate opportunity when he should again interrogate her,
or receive an avowal _proprio motu_. At the door of her apartment the
baroness met Mademoiselle Cornélie, her confidential maid. "What is my
daughter doing?" asked Madame Danglars.

"She practiced all the evening, and then went to bed," replied
Mademoiselle Cornélie.

"Yet I think I hear her piano."

"It is Mademoiselle Louise d'Armilly, who is playing while Mademoiselle
Danglars is in bed."

"Well," said Madame Danglars, "come and undress me." They entered the
bedroom. Debray stretched himself upon a large couch, and Madame
Danglars passed into her dressing-room with Mademoiselle Cornélie. "My
dear M. Lucien," said Madame Danglars through the door, "you are always
complaining that Eugénie will not address a word to you."

"Madame," said Lucien, playing with a little dog, who, recognizing him
as a friend of the house, expected to be caressed, "I am not the only
one who makes similar complaints, I think I heard Morcerf say that he
could not extract a word from his betrothed."

"True," said Madame Danglars; "yet I think this will all pass off, and
that you will one day see her enter your study."

"My study?"

"At least that of the minister."

"Why so!"

"To ask for an engagement at the Opera. Really, I never saw such an
infatuation for music; it is quite ridiculous for a young lady of
fashion." Debray smiled. "Well," said he, "let her come, with your
consent and that of the baron, and we will try and give her an
engagement, though we are very poor to pay such talent as hers."

"Go, Cornélie," said Madame Danglars, "I do not require you any longer."

Cornélie obeyed, and the next minute Madame Danglars left her room in a
charming loose dress, and came and sat down close to Debray. Then she
began thoughtfully to caress the little spaniel. Lucien looked at her
for a moment in silence. "Come, Hermine," he said, after a short time,
"answer candidly,--something vexes you--is it not so?"

"Nothing," answered the baroness.


And yet, as she could scarcely breathe, she rose and went towards a
looking-glass. "I am frightful tonight," she said. Debray rose, smiling,
and was about to contradict the baroness upon this latter point, when
the door opened suddenly. M. Danglars appeared; Debray reseated himself.
At the noise of the door Madame Danglars turned round, and looked upon
her husband with an astonishment she took no trouble to conceal. "Good-
evening, madame," said the banker; "good-evening, M. Debray."

Probably the baroness thought this unexpected visit signified a desire
to make up for the sharp words he had uttered during the day. Assuming a
dignified air, she turned round to Debray, without answering her
husband. "Read me something, M. Debray," she said. Debray, who was
slightly disturbed at this visit, recovered himself when he saw the
calmness of the baroness, and took up a book marked by a mother-of-pearl
knife inlaid with gold. "Excuse me," said the banker, "but you will tire
yourself, baroness, by such late hours, and M. Debray lives some
distance from here."

Debray was petrified, not only to hear Danglars speak so calmly and
politely, but because it was apparent that beneath outward politeness
there really lurked a determined spirit of opposition to anything his
wife might wish to do. The baroness was also surprised, and showed her
astonishment by a look which would doubtless have had some effect upon
her husband if he had not been intently occupied with the paper, where
he was looking to see the closing stock quotations. The result was, that
the proud look entirely failed of its purpose.

"M. Lucien," said the baroness, "I assure you I have no desire to sleep,
and that I have a thousand things to tell you this evening, which you
must listen to, even though you slept while hearing me."

"I am at your service, madame," replied Lucien coldly.

"My dear M. Debray," said the banker, "do not kill yourself tonight
listening to the follies of Madame Danglars, for you can hear them as
well tomorrow; but I claim tonight and will devote it, if you will allow
me, to talk over some serious matters with my wife." This time the blow
was so well aimed, and hit so directly, that Lucien and the baroness
were staggered, and they interrogated each other with their eyes, as if
to seek help against this aggression, but the irresistible will of the
master of the house prevailed, and the husband was victorious.

"Do not think I wish to turn you out, my dear Debray," continued
Danglars; "oh, no, not at all. An unexpected occurrence forces me to ask
my wife to have a little conversation with me; it is so rarely I make
such a request, I am sure you cannot grudge it to me." Debray muttered
something, bowed and went out, knocking himself against the edge of the
door, like Nathan in _Athalie_.

"It is extraordinary," he said, when the door was closed behind him,
"how easily these husbands, whom we ridicule, gain an advantage over
us."


Lucien having left, Danglars took his place on the sofa, closed the open
book, and placing himself in a dreadfully dictatorial attitude, he began
playing with the dog; but the animal, not liking him as well as Debray,
and attempting to bite him, Danglars seized him by the skin of his neck
and threw him upon a couch on the other side of the room. The animal
uttered a cry during the transit, but, arrived at its destination, it
crouched behind the cushions, and stupefied at such unusual treatment
