
"What do you wish to see first?" asked the abbé.

"Oh, your great work on the monarchy of Italy!"

Faria then drew forth from his hiding-place three or four rolls of
linen, laid one over the other, like folds of papyrus. These rolls
consisted of slips of cloth about four inches wide and eighteen long;
they were all carefully numbered and closely covered with writing, so
legible that Dantès could easily read it, as well as make out the sense-
-it being in Italian, a language he, as a Provençal, perfectly
understood.

"There," said he, "there is the work complete. I wrote the word _finis_
at the end of the sixty-eighth strip about a week ago. I have torn up
two of my shirts, and as many handkerchiefs as I was master of, to
complete the precious pages. Should I ever get out of prison and find in
all Italy a printer courageous enough to publish what I have composed,
my literary reputation is forever secured."

"I see," answered Dantès. "Now let me behold the curious pens with which
you have written your work."

"Look!" said Faria, showing to the young man a slender stick about six
inches long, and much resembling the size of the handle of a fine
painting-brush, to the end of which was tied, by a piece of thread, one
of those cartilages of which the abbé had before spoken to Dantès; it
was pointed, and divided at the nib like an ordinary pen. Dantès
examined it with intense admiration, then looked around to see the
instrument with which it had been shaped so correctly into form.

"Ah, yes," said Faria; "the penknife. That's my masterpiece. I made it,
as well as this larger knife, out of an old iron candlestick." The
penknife was sharp and keen as a razor; as for the other knife, it would
serve a double purpose, and with it one could cut and thrust.

Dantès examined the various articles shown to him with the same
attention that he had bestowed on the curiosities and strange tools
exhibited in the shops at Marseilles as the works of the savages in the
South Seas from whence they had been brought by the different trading
vessels.

"As for the ink," said Faria, "I told you how I managed to obtain that--
and I only just make it from time to time, as I require it."

"One thing still puzzles me," observed Dantès, "and that is how you
managed to do all this by daylight?"

"I worked at night also," replied Faria.

"Night!--why, for heaven's sake, are your eyes like cats', that you can
see to work in the dark?"

"Indeed they are not; but God has supplied man with the intelligence
that enables him to overcome the limitations of natural conditions. I
furnished myself with a light."

"You did? Pray tell me how."

"I separated the fat from the meat served to me, melted it, and so made
oil--here is my lamp." So saying, the abbé exhibited a sort of torch
very similar to those used in public illuminations.

"But light?"

"Here are two flints and a piece of burnt linen."

"And matches?"

"I pretended that I had a disorder of the skin, and asked for a little
sulphur, which was readily supplied." Dantès laid the different things
he had been looking at on the table, and stood with his head drooping on
his breast, as though overwhelmed by the perseverance and strength of
Faria's mind.


"You have not seen all yet," continued Faria, "for I did not think it
wise to trust all my treasures in the same hiding-place. Let us shut
this one up." They put the stone back in its place; the abbé sprinkled a
little dust over it to conceal the traces of its having been removed,
rubbed his foot well on it to make it assume the same appearance as the
other, and then, going towards his bed, he removed it from the spot it
stood in. Behind the head of the bed, and concealed by a stone fitting
in so closely as to defy all suspicion, was a hollow space, and in this
space a ladder of cords between twenty-five and thirty feet in length.
Dantès closely and eagerly examined it; he found it firm, solid, and
compact enough to bear any weight.

"Who supplied you with the materials for making this wonderful work?"

"I tore up several of my shirts, and ripped out the seams in the sheets
of my bed, during my three years' imprisonment at Fenestrelle; and when
I was removed to the Château d'If, I managed to bring the ravellings
with me, so that I have been able to finish my work here."

"And was it not discovered that your sheets were unhemmed?"

"Oh, no, for when I had taken out the thread I required, I hemmed the
edges over again."

"With what?"

"With this needle," said the abbé, as, opening his ragged vestments, he
showed Dantès a long, sharp fish-bone, with a small perforated eye for
the thread, a small portion of which still remained in it. "I once
thought," continued Faria, "of removing these iron bars, and letting
myself down from the window, which, as you see, is somewhat wider than
yours, although I should have enlarged it still more preparatory to my
flight; however, I discovered that I should merely have dropped into a
sort of inner court, and I therefore renounced the project altogether as
too full of risk and danger. Nevertheless, I carefully preserved my
ladder against one of those unforeseen opportunities of which I spoke
just now, and which sudden chance frequently brings about." While
affecting to be deeply engaged in examining the ladder, the mind of
Dantès was, in fact, busily occupied by the idea that a person so
intelligent, ingenious, and clear-sighted as the abbé might probably be
able to solve the dark mystery of his own misfortunes, where he himself
could see nothing.

"What are you thinking of?" asked the abbé smilingly, imputing the deep
abstraction in which his visitor was plunged to the excess of his awe
and wonder.

"I was reflecting, in the first place," replied Dantès, "upon the
enormous degree of intelligence and ability you must have employed to
reach the high perfection to which you have attained. What would you not
have accomplished if you had been free?"

"Possibly nothing at all; the overflow of my brain would probably, in a
state of freedom, have evaporated in a thousand follies; misfortune is
needed to bring to light the treasures of the human intellect.
Compression is needed to explode gunpowder. Captivity has brought my
mental faculties to a focus; and you are well aware that from the
collision of clouds electricity is produced--from electricity,
lightning, from lightning, illumination."

"No," replied Dantès. "I know nothing. Some of your words are to me
quite empty of meaning. You must be blessed indeed to possess the
knowledge you have."

The abbé smiled. "Well," said he, "but you had another subject for your
thoughts; did you not say so just now?"

"I did!"

"You have told me as yet but one of them--let me hear the other."

"It was this,--that while you had related to me all the particulars of
your past life, you were perfectly unacquainted with mine."

"Your life, my young friend, has not been of sufficient length to admit
of your having passed through any very important events."

"It has been long enough to inflict on me a great and undeserved
misfortune. I would fain fix the source of it on man that I may no
longer vent reproaches upon heaven."

"Then you profess ignorance of the crime with which you are charged?"

"I do, indeed; and this I swear by the two beings most dear to me upon
earth,--my father and Mercédès."

"Come," said the abbé, closing his hiding-place, and pushing the bed
back to its original situation, "let me hear your story."

Dantès obeyed, and commenced what he called his history, but which
consisted only of the account of a voyage to India, and two or three
voyages to the Levant, until he arrived at the recital of his last
cruise, with the death of Captain Leclere, and the receipt of a packet
to be delivered by himself to the grand marshal; his interview with that
personage, and his receiving, in place of the packet brought, a letter
addressed to a Monsieur Noirtier--his arrival at Marseilles, and
interview with his father--his affection for Mercédès, and their nuptual
feast--his arrest and subsequent examination, his temporary detention at
the Palais de Justice, and his final imprisonment in the Château d'If.
From this point everything was a blank to Dantès--he knew nothing more,
not even the length of time he had been imprisoned. His recital
finished, the abbé reflected long and earnestly.

"There is," said he, at the end of his meditations, "a clever maxim,
which bears upon what I was saying to you some little while ago, and
that is, that unless wicked ideas take root in a naturally depraved
mind, human nature, in a right and wholesome state, revolts at crime.
Still, from an artificial civilization have originated wants, vices, and
false tastes, which occasionally become so powerful as to stifle within
us all good feelings, and ultimately to lead us into guilt and
wickedness. From this view of things, then, comes the axiom that if you
visit to discover the author of any bad action, seek first to discover
the person to whom the perpetration of that bad action could be in any
way advantageous. Now, to apply it in your case,--to whom could your
disappearance have been serviceable?"

"To no one, by heaven! I was a very insignificant person."

"Do not speak thus, for your reply evinces neither logic nor philosophy;
everything is relative, my dear young friend, from the king who stands
in the way of his successor, to the employee who keeps his rival out of
a place. Now, in the event of the king's death, his successor inherits a
crown,--when the employee dies, the supernumerary steps into his shoes,
and receives his salary of twelve thousand livres. Well, these twelve
