perhaps you may not have to retract."

"Bah," said Albert, staring.

"Doubtless, my dear viscount, you will not be taken by force; and
seriously, do you wish to break off your engagement?"

"I would give a hundred thousand francs to be able to do so."

"Then make yourself quite easy. M. Danglars would give double that sum
to attain the same end."

"Am I, indeed, so happy?" said Albert, who still could not prevent an
almost imperceptible cloud passing across his brow. "But, my dear count,
has M. Danglars any reason?"

"Ah, there is your proud and selfish nature. You would expose the self-
love of another with a hatchet, but you shrink if your own is attacked
with a needle."

"But yet M. Danglars appeared----"

"Delighted with you, was he not? Well, he is a man of bad taste, and is
still more enchanted with another. I know not whom; look and judge for
yourself."

"Thank you, I understand. But my mother--no, not my mother; I mistake--
my father intends giving a ball."

"A ball at this season?"

"Summer balls are fashionable."

"If they were not, the countess has only to wish it, and they would
become so."

"You are right; You know they are select affairs; those who remain in
Paris in July must be true Parisians. Will you take charge of our
invitation to Messieurs Cavalcanti?"

"When will it take place?"

"On Saturday."

"M. Cavalcanti's father will be gone."

"But the son will be here; will you invite young M. Cavalcanti?"

"I do not know him, viscount."

"You do not know him?"

"No, I never saw him until a few days since, and am not responsible for
him."

"But you receive him at your house?"

"That is another thing: he was recommended to me by a good abbé, who may
be deceived. Give him a direct invitation, but do not ask me to present
him. If he were afterwards to marry Mademoiselle Danglars, you would
accuse me of intrigue, and would be challenging me,--besides, I may not
be there myself."

"Where?"

"At your ball."

"Why should you not be there?"

"Because you have not yet invited me."

"But I come expressly for that purpose."

"You are very kind, but I may be prevented."

"If I tell you one thing, you will be so amiable as to set aside all
impediments."

"Tell me what it is."

"My mother begs you to come."

"The Comtesse de Morcerf?" said Monte Cristo, starting.

"Ah, count," said Albert, "I assure you Madame de Morcerf speaks freely
to me, and if you have not felt those sympathetic fibres of which I
spoke just now thrill within you, you must be entirely devoid of them,
for during the last four days we have spoken of no one else."

"You have talked of me?"

"Yes, that is the penalty of being a living puzzle!"

"Then I am also a puzzle to your mother? I should have thought her too
reasonable to be led by imagination."

"A problem, my dear count, for everyone--for my mother as well as
others; much studied, but not solved, you still remain an enigma, do not
fear. My mother is only astonished that you remain so long unsolved. I
believe, while the Countess G---- takes you for Lord Ruthven, my mother
imagines you to be Cagliostro or the Count Saint-Germain. The first
opportunity you have, confirm her in her opinion; it will be easy for
you, as you have the philosophy of the one and the wit of the other."

"I thank you for the warning," said the count; "I shall endeavor to be
prepared for all suppositions."

"You will, then, come on Saturday?"

"Yes, since Madame de Morcerf invites me."

"You are very kind."

"Will M. Danglars be there?"

"He has already been invited by my father. We shall try to persuade the
great d'Aguesseau,[*] M. de Villefort, to come, but have not much hope
of seeing him."


* Magistrate and orator of great eloquence--chancellor of France under
Louis XV.

"'Never despair of anything,' says the proverb."

"Do you dance, count?"

"I dance?"

"Yes, you; it would not be astonishing."

"That is very well before one is over forty. No, I do not dance, but I
like to see others do so. Does Madame de Morcerf dance?"

"Never; you can talk to her, she so delights in your conversation."

"Indeed?"


"Yes, truly; and I assure you. You are the only man of whom I have heard
her speak with interest." Albert rose and took his hat; the count
conducted him to the door. "I have one thing to reproach myself with,"
said he, stopping Albert on the steps. "What is it?"

"I have spoken to you indiscreetly about Danglars."

"On the contrary, speak to me always in the same strain about him."

"I am glad to be reassured on that point. Apropos, when do you aspect M.
d'Epinay?"

"Five or six days hence at the latest."

"And when is he to be married?"

"Immediately on the arrival of M. and Madame de Saint-Méran."

"Bring him to see me. Although you say I do not like him, I assure you I
shall be happy to see him."

"I will obey your orders, my lord."

"Good-bye."

"Until Saturday, when I may expect you, may I not?"

"Yes, I promised you." The Count watched Albert, waving his hand to him.
When he had mounted his phaeton, Monte Cristo turned, and seeing
Bertuccio, "What news?" said he.

"She went to the Palais," replied the steward.

"Did she stay long there?"

"An hour and a half."

"Did she return home?"

"Directly."

"Well, my dear Bertuccio," said the count, "I now advise you to go in
quest of the little estate I spoke to you of in Normandy." Bertuccio
bowed, and as his wishes were in perfect harmony with the order he had
received, he started the same evening.



Chapter 69. The Inquiry

M. de Villefort kept the promise he had made to Madame Danglars, to
endeavor to find out how the Count of Monte Cristo had discovered the
history of the house at Auteuil. He wrote the same day for the required
information to M. de Boville, who, from having been an inspector of
prisons, was promoted to a high office in the police; and the latter
begged for two days time to ascertain exactly who would be most likely
to give him full particulars. At the end of the second day M. de
Villefort received the following note:--

"The person called the Count of Monte Cristo is an intimate acquaintance
of Lord Wilmore, a rich foreigner, who is sometimes seen in Paris and
