possession of an income of 300,000 livres.

While all the proceedings relative to the dissolution of the marriage-
contract were being carried on at the house of M. de Villefort, Monte
Cristo had paid his visit to the Count of Morcerf, who, in order to lose
no time in responding to M. Danglars' wishes, and at the same time to
pay all due deference to his position in society, donned his uniform of
lieutenant-general, which he ornamented with all his crosses, and thus
attired, ordered his finest horses and drove to the Rue de la Chaussée
d'Antin.

Danglars was balancing his monthly accounts, and it was perhaps not the
most favorable moment for finding him in his best humor. At the first
sight of his old friend, Danglars assumed his majestic air, and settled
himself in his easy-chair. Morcerf, usually so stiff and formal,
accosted the banker in an affable and smiling manner, and, feeling sure
that the overture he was about to make would be well received, he did
not consider it necessary to adopt any manœuvres in order to gain his
end, but went at once straight to the point.


"Well, baron," said he, "here I am at last; some time has elapsed since
our plans were formed, and they are not yet executed." Morcerf paused at
these words, quietly waiting till the cloud should have dispersed which
had gathered on the brow of Danglars, and which he attributed to his
silence; but, on the contrary, to his great surprise, it grew darker and
darker. "To what do you allude, monsieur?" said Danglars; as if he were
trying in vain to guess at the possible meaning of the general's words.

"Ah," said Morcerf, "I see you are a stickler for forms, my dear sir,
and you would remind me that the ceremonial rites should not be omitted.
_Ma foi_, I beg your pardon, but as I have but one son, and it is the
first time I have ever thought of marrying him, I am still serving my
apprenticeship, you know; come, I will reform." And Morcerf with a
forced smile arose, and, making a low bow to M. Danglars, said: "Baron,
I have the honor of asking of you the hand of Mademoiselle Eugénie
Danglars for my son, the Vicomte Albert de Morcerf."

But Danglars, instead of receiving this address in the favorable manner
which Morcerf had expected, knit his brow, and without inviting the
count, who was still standing, to take a seat, he said: "Monsieur, it
will be necessary to reflect before I give you an answer."

"To reflect?" said Morcerf, more and more astonished; "have you not had
enough time for reflection during the eight years which have elapsed
since this marriage was first discussed between us?"

"Count," said the banker, "things are constantly occurring in the world
to induce us to lay aside our most established opinions, or at all
events to cause us to remodel them according to the change of
circumstances, which may have placed affairs in a totally different
light to that in which we at first viewed them."

"I do not understand you, baron," said Morcerf.

"What I mean to say is this, sir,--that during the last fortnight
unforeseen circumstances have occurred----"

"Excuse me," said Morcerf, "but is it a play we are acting?"

"A play?"

"Yes, for it is like one; pray let us come more to the point, and
endeavor thoroughly to understand each other."

"That is quite my desire."

"You have seen M. de Monte Cristo have you not?"

"I see him very often," said Danglars, drawing himself up; "he is a
particular friend of mine."

"Well, in one of your late conversations with him, you said that I
appeared to be forgetful and irresolute concerning this marriage, did
you not?"

"I did say so."

"Well, here I am, proving at once that I am really neither the one nor
the other, by entreating you to keep your promise on that score."

Danglars did not answer. "Have you so soon changed your mind," added
Morcerf, "or have you only provoked my request that you may have the
pleasure of seeing me humbled?" Danglars, seeing that if he continued
the conversation in the same tone in which he had begun it, the whole
thing might turn out to his own disadvantage, turned to Morcerf, and
said: "Count, you must doubtless be surprised at my reserve, and I
assure you it costs me much to act in such a manner towards you; but,
believe me when I say that imperative necessity has imposed the painful
task upon me."

"These are all so many empty words, my dear sir," said Morcerf: "they
might satisfy a new acquaintance, but the Comte de Morcerf does not rank
in that list; and when a man like him comes to another, recalls to him
his plighted word, and this man fails to redeem the pledge, he has at
least a right to exact from him a good reason for so doing." Danglars
was a coward, but did not wish to appear so; he was piqued at the tone
which Morcerf had just assumed. "I am not without a good reason for my
conduct," replied the banker.

"What do you mean to say?"

"I mean to say that I have a good reason, but that it is difficult to
explain."

"You must be aware, at all events, that it is impossible for me to
understand motives before they are explained to me; but one thing at
least is clear, which is, that you decline allying yourself with my
family."

"No, sir," said Danglars; "I merely suspend my decision, that is all."

"And do you really flatter yourself that I shall yield to all your
caprices, and quietly and humbly await the time of again being received
into your good graces?"

"Then, count, if you will not wait, we must look upon these projects as
if they had never been entertained." The count bit his lips till the
blood almost started, to prevent the ebullition of anger which his proud
and irritable temper scarcely allowed him to restrain; understanding,
however, that in the present state of things the laugh would decidedly
be against him, he turned from the door, towards which he had been
directing his steps, and again confronted the banker. A cloud settled on
his brow, evincing decided anxiety and uneasiness, instead of the
expression of offended pride which had lately reigned there. "My dear
Danglars," said Morcerf, "we have been acquainted for many years, and
consequently we ought to make some allowance for each other's failings.
You owe me an explanation, and really it is but fair that I should know
what circumstance has occurred to deprive my son of your favor."

"It is from no personal ill-feeling towards the viscount, that is all I
can say, sir," replied Danglars, who resumed his insolent manner as soon
as he perceived that Morcerf was a little softened and calmed down. "And
towards whom do you bear this personal ill-feeling, then?" said Morcerf,
turning pale with anger. The expression of the count's face had not
remained unperceived by the banker; he fixed on him a look of greater
assurance than before, and said: "You may, perhaps, be better satisfied
that I should not go farther into particulars."

A tremor of suppressed rage shook the whole frame of the count, and
making a violent effort over himself, he said: "I have a right to insist
on your giving me an explanation. Is it Madame de Morcerf who has
displeased you? Is it my fortune which you find insufficient? Is it
because my opinions differ from yours?"

"Nothing of the kind, sir," replied Danglars: "if such had been the
case, I only should have been to blame, inasmuch as I was aware of all
these things when I made the engagement. No, do not seek any longer to
discover the reason. I really am quite ashamed to have been the cause of
your undergoing such severe self-examination; let us drop the subject,
and adopt the middle course of delay, which implies neither a rupture
nor an engagement. _Ma foi_, there is no hurry. My daughter is only
seventeen years old, and your son twenty-one. While we wait, time will
be progressing, events will succeed each other; things which in the
evening look dark and obscure, appear but too clearly in the light of
morning, and sometimes the utterance of one word, or the lapse of a
single day, will reveal the most cruel calumnies."

"Calumnies, did you say, sir?" cried Morcerf, turning livid with rage.
"Does anyone dare to slander me?"

"Monsieur, I told you that I considered it best to avoid all
explanation."

"Then, sir, I am patiently to submit to your refusal?"

"Yes, sir, although I assure you the refusal is as painful for me to
give as it is for you to receive, for I had reckoned on the honor of
your alliance, and the breaking off of a marriage contract always
injures the lady more than the gentleman."

"Enough, sir," said Morcerf, "we will speak no more on the subject." And
clutching his gloves in anger, he left the apartment. Danglars observed
that during the whole conversation Morcerf had never once dared to ask
if it was on his own account that Danglars recalled his word. That
evening he had a long conference with several friends; and M.
Cavalcanti, who had remained in the drawing-room with the ladies, was
the last to leave the banker's house.

The next morning, as soon as he awoke, Danglars asked for the
newspapers; they were brought to him; he laid aside three or four, and
at last fixed on _l'Impartial_, the paper of which Beauchamp was the
chief editor. He hastily tore off the cover, opened the journal with
nervous precipitation, passed contemptuously over the Paris jottings,
and arriving at the miscellaneous intelligence, stopped with a malicious
smile, at a paragraph headed

_We hear from Yanina._

"Very good," observed Danglars, after having read the paragraph; "here
is a little article on Colonel Fernand, which, if I am not mistaken,
would render the explanation which the Comte de Morcerf required of me
perfectly unnecessary."

At the same moment, that is, at nine o'clock in the morning, Albert de
Morcerf, dressed in a black coat buttoned up to his chin, might have
been seen walking with a quick and agitated step in the direction of
Monte Cristo's house in the Champs-Élysées. When he presented himself at
the gate the porter informed him that the Count had gone out about half
an hour previously. "Did he take Baptistin with him?"
