which she found her carriage, and her coachman sleeping peacefully on
his box while waiting for her.



Chapter 68. A Summer Ball

The same day during the interview between Madame Danglars and the
procureur, a travelling-carriage entered the Rue du Helder, passed
through the gateway of No. 27, and stopped in the yard. In a moment the
door was opened, and Madame de Morcerf alighted, leaning on her son's
arm. Albert soon left her, ordered his horses, and having arranged his
toilet, drove to the Champs-Élysées, to the house of Monte Cristo. The
count received him with his habitual smile. It was a strange thing that
no one ever appeared to advance a step in that man's favor. Those who
would, as it were, force a passage to his heart, found an impassable
barrier. Morcerf, who ran towards him with open arms, was chilled as he
drew near, in spite of the friendly smile, and simply held out his hand.
Monte Cristo shook it coldly, according to his invariable practice.
"Here I am, dear count."

"Welcome home again."

"I arrived an hour since."

"From Dieppe?"

"No, from Tréport."

"Indeed?"

"And I have come at once to see you."

"That is extremely kind of you," said Monte Cristo with a tone of
perfect indifference.

"And what is the news?"

"You should not ask a stranger, a foreigner, for news."

"I know it, but in asking for news, I mean, have you done anything for
me?"

"Had you commissioned me?" said Monte Cristo, feigning uneasiness.

"Come, come," said Albert, "do not assume so much indifference. It is
said, sympathy travels rapidly, and when at Tréport, I felt the electric
shock; you have either been working for me or thinking of me."

"Possibly," said Monte Cristo, "I have indeed thought of you, but the
magnetic wire I was guiding acted, indeed, without my knowledge."

"Indeed? Pray tell me how it happened?"

"Willingly. M. Danglars dined with me."

"I know it; to avoid meeting him, my mother and I left town."


"But he met here M. Andrea Cavalcanti."

"Your Italian prince?"

"Not so fast; M. Andrea only calls himself count."

"Calls himself, do you say?"

"Yes, calls himself."

"Is he not a count?"

"What can I know of him? He calls himself so. I, of course, give him the
same title, and everyone else does likewise."

"What a strange man you are! What next? You say M. Danglars dined here?"

"Yes, with Count Cavalcanti, the marquis his father, Madame Danglars, M.
and Madame de Villefort,--charming people,--M. Debray, Maximilian
Morrel, and M. de Château-Renaud."

"Did they speak of me?"

"Not a word."

"So much the worse."

"Why so? I thought you wished them to forget you?"

"If they did not speak of me, I am sure they thought about me, and I am
in despair."

"How will that affect you, since Mademoiselle Danglars was not among the
number here who thought of you? Truly, she might have thought of you at
home."

"I have no fear of that; or, if she did, it was only in the same way in
which I think of her."

"Touching sympathy! So you hate each other?" said the count.

"Listen," said Morcerf--"if Mademoiselle Danglars were disposed to take
pity on my supposed martyrdom on her account, and would dispense with
all matrimonial formalities between our two families, I am ready to
agree to the arrangement. In a word, Mademoiselle Danglars would make a
charming mistress--but a wife--_diable!_"

"And this," said Monte Cristo, "is your opinion of your intended
spouse?"

"Yes; it is rather unkind, I acknowledge, but it is true. But as this
dream cannot be realized, since Mademoiselle Danglars must become my
lawful wife, live perpetually with me, sing to me, compose verses and
music within ten paces of me, and that for my whole life, it frightens
me. One may forsake a mistress, but a wife,--good heavens! There she
must always be; and to marry Mademoiselle Danglars would be awful."

"You are difficult to please, viscount."

"Yes, for I often wish for what is impossible."

"What is that?"

"To find such a wife as my father found." Monte Cristo turned pale, and
looked at Albert, while playing with some magnificent pistols.

"Your father was fortunate, then?" said he.

"You know my opinion of my mother, count; look at her,--still beautiful,
witty, more charming than ever. For any other son to have stayed with
his mother for four days at Tréport, it would have been a condescension
or a martyrdom, while I return, more contented, more peaceful--shall I
say more poetic!--than if I had taken Queen Mab or Titania as my
companion."


"That is an overwhelming demonstration, and you would make everyone vow
to live a single life."

"Such are my reasons for not liking to marry Mademoiselle Danglars. Have
you ever noticed how much a thing is heightened in value when we obtain
possession of it? The diamond which glittered in the window at Marlé's
or Fossin's shines with more splendor when it is our own; but if we are
compelled to acknowledge the superiority of another, and still must
retain the one that is inferior, do you not know what we have to
endure?"

"Worldling," murmured the count.

"Thus I shall rejoice when Mademoiselle Eugénie perceives I am but a
pitiful atom, with scarcely as many hundred thousand francs as she has
millions." Monte Cristo smiled. "One plan occurred to me," continued
Albert; "Franz likes all that is eccentric; I tried to make him fall in
love with Mademoiselle Danglars; but in spite of four letters, written
in the most alluring style, he invariably answered: 'My eccentricity may
be great, but it will not make me break my promise.'"

"That is what I call devoted friendship, to recommend to another one
whom you would not marry yourself." Albert smiled.--"Apropos," continued
he, "Franz is coming soon, but it will not interest you; you dislike
him, I think?"

"I?" said Monte Cristo; "my dear Viscount, how have you discovered that
I did not like M. Franz! I like everyone."

"And you include me in the expression everyone--many thanks!"

"Let us not mistake," said Monte Cristo; "I love everyone as God
commands us to love our neighbor, as Christians; but I thoroughly hate
but a few. Let us return to M. Franz d'Epinay. Did you say he was
coming?"

"Yes; summoned by M. de Villefort, who is apparently as anxious to get
Mademoiselle Valentine married as M. Danglars is to see Mademoiselle
Eugénie settled. It must be a very irksome office to be the father of a
grown-up daughter; it seems to make one feverish, and to raise one's
pulse to ninety beats a minute until the deed is done."

"But M. d'Epinay, unlike you, bears his misfortune patiently."

"Still more, he talks seriously about the matter, puts on a white tie,
and speaks of his family. He entertains a very high opinion of M. and
Madame de Villefort."

"Which they deserve, do they not?"

"I believe they do. M. de Villefort has always passed for a severe but a
just man."

"There is, then, one," said Monte Cristo, "whom you do not condemn like
poor Danglars?"

"Because I am not compelled to marry his daughter perhaps," replied
Albert, laughing.

"Indeed, my dear sir," said Monte Cristo, "you are revoltingly foppish."

"I foppish? how do you mean?"

"Yes; pray take a cigar, and cease to defend yourself, and to struggle
to escape marrying Mademoiselle Danglars. Let things take their course;
