"Here I am in their name," said M. de Boville; "but did you receive my
letter yesterday?"


"Yes."

"I have brought my receipt."

"My dear M. de Boville, your widows and orphans must oblige me by
waiting twenty-four hours, since M. de Monte Cristo whom you just saw
leaving here--you did see him, I think?"

"Yes; well?"

"Well, M. de Monte Cristo has just carried off their five millions."

"How so?"

"The count has an unlimited credit upon me; a credit opened by Thomson &
French, of Rome; he came to demand five millions at once, which I paid
him with checks on the bank. My funds are deposited there, and you can
understand that if I draw out ten millions on the same day it will
appear rather strange to the governor. Two days will be a different
thing," said Danglars, smiling.

"Come," said Boville, with a tone of entire incredulity, "five millions
to that gentleman who just left, and who bowed to me as though he knew
me?"

"Perhaps he knows you, though you do not know him; M. de Monte Cristo
knows everybody."

"Five millions!"

"Here is his receipt. Believe your own eyes." M. de Boville took the
paper Danglars presented him, and read:--

"Received of Baron Danglars the sum of five million one hundred thousand
francs, to be repaid on demand by the house of Thomson & French of
Rome."

"It is really true," said M. de Boville.

"Do you know the house of Thomson & French?"

"Yes, I once had business to transact with it to the amount of 200,000
francs; but since then I have not heard it mentioned."

"It is one of the best houses in Europe," said Danglars, carelessly
throwing down the receipt on his desk.

"And he had five millions in your hands alone! Why, this Count of Monte
Cristo must be a nabob?"

"Indeed I do not know what he is; he has three unlimited credits--one on
me, one on Rothschild, one on Lafitte; and, you see," he added
carelessly, "he has given me the preference, by leaving a balance of
100,000 francs." M. de Boville manifested signs of extraordinary
admiration. "I must visit him," he said, "and obtain some pious grant
from him."

"Oh, you may make sure of him; his charities alone amount to 20,000
francs a month."

"It is magnificent! I will set before him the example of Madame de
Morcerf and her son."

"What example?"

"They gave all their fortune to the hospitals."

"What fortune?"

"Their own--M. de Morcerf's, who is deceased."

"For what reason?"

"Because they would not spend money so guiltily acquired."

"And what are they to live upon?"

"The mother retires into the country, and the son enters the army."


"Well, I must confess, these are scruples."

"I registered their deed of gift yesterday."

"And how much did they possess?"

"Oh, not much--from twelve to thirteen hundred thousand francs. But to
return to our millions."

"Certainly," said Danglars, in the most natural tone in the world. "Are
you then pressed for this money?"

"Yes; for the examination of our cash takes place tomorrow."

"Tomorrow? Why did you not tell me so before? Why, it is as good as a
century! At what hour does the examination take place?"

"At two o'clock."

"Send at twelve," said Danglars, smiling. M. de Boville said nothing,
but nodded his head, and took up the portfolio. "Now I think of it, you
can do better," said Danglars.

"How do you mean?"

"The receipt of M. de Monte Cristo is as good as money; take it to
Rothschild's or Lafitte's, and they will take it off your hands at
once."

"What, though payable at Rome?"

"Certainly; it will only cost you a discount of 5,000 or 6,000 francs."
The receiver started back. "_Ma foi!_" he said, "I prefer waiting till
tomorrow. What a proposition!"

"I thought, perhaps," said Danglars with supreme impertinence, "that you
had a deficiency to make up?"

"Indeed," said the receiver.

"And if that were the case it would be worth while to make some
sacrifice."

"Thank you, no, sir."

"Then it will be tomorrow."

"Yes; but without fail."

"Ah, you are laughing at me; send tomorrow at twelve, and the bank shall
be notified."

"I will come myself."

"Better still, since it will afford me the pleasure of seeing you." They
shook hands. "By the way," said M. de Boville, "are you not going to the
funeral of poor Mademoiselle de Villefort, which I met on my road here?"

"No," said the banker; "I have appeared rather ridiculous since that
affair of Benedetto, so I remain in the background."

"Bah, you are wrong. How were you to blame in that affair?"

"Listen--when one bears an irreproachable name, as I do, one is rather
sensitive."

"Everybody pities you, sir; and, above all, Mademoiselle Danglars!"

"Poor Eugénie!" said Danglars; "do you know she is going to embrace a
religious life?"

"No."

"Alas, it is unhappily but too true. The day after the event, she
decided on leaving Paris with a nun of her acquaintance; they are gone
to seek a very strict convent in Italy or Spain."

"Oh, it is terrible!" and M. de Boville retired with this exclamation,
after expressing acute sympathy with the father. But he had scarcely
left before Danglars, with an energy of action those can alone
understand who have seen Robert Macaire represented by Frédérick, [*]
exclaimed,--"Fool!" Then enclosing Monte Cristo's receipt in a little
pocket-book, he added:--"Yes, come at twelve o'clock; I shall then be
far away." Then he double-locked his door, emptied all his drawers,
collected about fifty thousand francs in bank-notes, burned several
papers, left others exposed to view, and then commenced writing a letter
which he addressed:

"To Madame la Baronne Danglars."


* Frédérick Lemaître--French actor (1800-1876). Robert Macaire is the
hero of two favorite melodramas--"Chien de Montargis" and "Chien
d'Aubry"--and the name is applied to bold criminals as a term of
derision.

"I will place it on her table myself tonight," he murmured. Then taking
a passport from his drawer he said,--"Good, it is available for two
months longer."



Chapter 105. The Cemetery of Père-Lachaise

M. de Boville had indeed met the funeral procession which was taking
Valentine to her last home on earth. The weather was dull and stormy, a
cold wind shook the few remaining yellow leaves from the boughs of the
trees, and scattered them among the crowd which filled the boulevards.
M. de Villefort, a true Parisian, considered the cemetery of Père-
Lachaise alone worthy of receiving the mortal remains of a Parisian
family; there alone the corpses belonging to him would be surrounded by
worthy associates. He had therefore purchased a vault, which was quickly
occupied by members of his family. On the front of the monument was
inscribed: "The families of Saint-Méran and Villefort," for such had
been the last wish expressed by poor Renée, Valentine's mother. The
pompous procession therefore wended its way towards Père-Lachaise from
