demands; and were you even to require a million----"

"I beg your pardon," interposed Monte Cristo.

"I said a million," replied Danglars, with the confidence of ignorance.

"But could I do with a million?" retorted the count. "My dear sir, if a
trifle like that could suffice me, I should never have given myself the
trouble of opening an account. A million? Excuse my smiling when you
speak of a sum I am in the habit of carrying in my pocket-book or
dressing-case." And with these words Monte Cristo took from his pocket a
small case containing his visiting-cards, and drew forth two orders on
the treasury for 500,000 francs each, payable at sight to the bearer. A
man like Danglars was wholly inaccessible to any gentler method of
correction. The effect of the present revelation was stunning; he
trembled and was on the verge of apoplexy. The pupils of his eyes, as he
gazed at Monte Cristo dilated horribly.

"Come, come," said Monte Cristo, "confess honestly that you have not
perfect confidence in Thomson & French. I understand, and foreseeing
that such might be the case, I took, in spite of my ignorance of
affairs, certain precautions. See, here are two similar letters to that
you have yourself received; one from the house of Arstein & Eskoles of
Vienna, to Baron Rothschild, the other drawn by Baring of London, upon
M. Lafitte. Now, sir, you have but to say the word, and I will spare you
all uneasiness by presenting my letter of credit to one or other of
these two firms." The blow had struck home, and Danglars was entirely
vanquished; with a trembling hand he took the two letters from the
count, who held them carelessly between finger and thumb, and proceeded
to scrutinize the signatures, with a minuteness that the count might
have regarded as insulting, had it not suited his present purpose to
mislead the banker. "Oh, sir," said Danglars, after he had convinced
himself of the authenticity of the documents he held, and rising as if
to salute the power of gold personified in the man before him,--"three
letters of unlimited credit! I can be no longer mistrustful, but you
must pardon me, my dear count, for confessing to some degree of
astonishment."

"Nay," answered Monte Cristo, with the most gentlemanly air, "'tis not
for such trifling sums as these that your banking house is to be
incommoded. Then, you can let me have some money, can you not?"

"Whatever you say, my dear count; I am at your orders."

"Why," replied Monte Cristo, "since we mutually understand each other--
for such I presume is the case?" Danglars bowed assentingly. "You are
quite sure that not a lurking doubt or suspicion lingers in your mind?"

"Oh, my dear count," exclaimed Danglars, "I never for an instant
entertained such a feeling towards you."

"No, you merely wished to be convinced, nothing more; but now that we
have come to so clear an understanding, and that all distrust and
suspicion are laid at rest, we may as well fix a sum as the probable
expenditure of the first year, suppose we say six millions to----"

"Six millions!" gasped Danglars--"so be it."

"Then, if I should require more," continued Monte Cristo in a careless
manner, "why, of course, I should draw upon you; but my present
intention is not to remain in France more than a year, and during that
period I scarcely think I shall exceed the sum I mentioned. However, we
shall see. Be kind enough, then, to send me 500,000 francs tomorrow. I
shall be at home till midday, or if not, I will leave a receipt with my
steward."

"The money you desire shall be at your house by ten o'clock tomorrow
morning, my dear count," replied Danglars. "How would you like to have
it? in gold, silver, or notes?"

"Half in gold, and the other half in bank-notes, if you please," said
the count, rising from his seat.

"I must confess to you, count," said Danglars, "that I have hitherto
imagined myself acquainted with the degree of all the great fortunes of
Europe, and still wealth such as yours has been wholly unknown to me.
May I presume to ask whether you have long possessed it?"

"It has been in the family a very long while," returned Monte Cristo, "a
sort of treasure expressly forbidden to be touched for a certain period
of years, during which the accumulated interest has doubled the capital.
The period appointed by the testator for the disposal of these riches
occurred only a short time ago, and they have only been employed by me
within the last few years. Your ignorance on the subject, therefore, is
easily accounted for. However, you will be better informed as to me and
my possessions ere long." And the count, while pronouncing these latter
words, accompanied them with one of those ghastly smiles that used to
strike terror into poor Franz d'Epinay.

"With your tastes, and means of gratifying them," continued Danglars,
"you will exhibit a splendor that must effectually put us poor miserable
millionaires quite in the shade. If I mistake not you are an admirer of
paintings, at least I judged so from the attention you appeared to be
bestowing on mine when I entered the room. If you will permit me, I
shall be happy to show you my picture gallery, composed entirely of
works by the ancient masters--warranted as such. Not a modern picture
among them. I cannot endure the modern school of painting."

"You are perfectly right in objecting to them, for this one great fault-
-that they have not yet had time to become old."

"Or will you allow me to show you several fine statues by Thorwaldsen,
Bartoloni, and Canova?--all foreign artists, for, as you may perceive, I
think but very indifferently of our French sculptors."

"You have a right to be unjust to them, monsieur; they are your
compatriots."

"But all this may come later, when we shall be better known to each
other. For the present, I will confine myself (if perfectly agreeable to
you) to introducing you to the Baroness Danglars--excuse my impatience,
my dear count, but a client like you is almost like a member of the
family." Monte Cristo bowed, in sign that he accepted the proffered
honor; Danglars rang and was answered by a servant in a showy livery.
"Is the baroness at home?" inquired Danglars.

"Yes, my lord," answered the man.

"And alone?"

"No, my lord, madame has visitors."

"Have you any objection to meet any persons who may be with madame, or
do you desire to preserve a strict _incognito_?"

"No, indeed," replied Monte Cristo with a smile, "I do not arrogate to
myself the right of so doing."

"And who is with madame?--M. Debray?" inquired Danglars, with an air of
indulgence and good-nature that made Monte Cristo smile, acquainted as
he was with the secrets of the banker's domestic life.

"Yes, my lord," replied the servant, "M. Debray is with madame."
Danglars nodded his head; then, turning to Monte Cristo, said, "M.
Lucien Debray is an old friend of ours, and private secretary to the
Minister of the Interior. As for my wife, I must tell you, she lowered
herself by marrying me, for she belongs to one of the most ancient
families in France. Her maiden name was De Servières, and her first
husband was Colonel the Marquis of Nargonne."

"I have not the honor of knowing Madame Danglars; but I have already met
M. Lucien Debray."

"Ah, indeed?" said Danglars; "and where was that?"

"At the house of M. de Morcerf."

"Ah, ha, you are acquainted with the young viscount, are you?"

"We were together a good deal during the Carnival at Rome."

"True, true," cried Danglars. "Let me see; have I not heard talk of some
strange adventure with bandits or thieves hid in ruins, and of his
having had a miraculous escape? I forget how, but I know he used to
amuse my wife and daughter by telling them about it after his return
from Italy."

"Her ladyship is waiting to receive you, gentlemen," said the servant,
who had gone to inquire the pleasure of his mistress. "With your
permission," said Danglars, bowing, "I will precede you, to show you the
way."

"By all means," replied Monte Cristo; "I follow you."



Chapter 47. The Dappled Grays

The baron, followed by the count, traversed a long series of apartments,
in which the prevailing characteristics were heavy magnificence and the
gaudiness of ostentatious wealth, until he reached the boudoir of Madame
Danglars--a small octagonal-shaped room, hung with pink satin, covered
with white Indian muslin. The chairs were of ancient workmanship and
materials; over the doors were painted sketches of shepherds and
shepherdesses, after the style and manner of Boucher; and at each side
pretty medallions in crayons, harmonizing well with the furnishings of
this charming apartment, the only one throughout the great mansion in
which any distinctive taste prevailed. The truth was, it had been
entirely overlooked in the plan arranged and followed out by M. Danglars
and his architect, who had been selected to aid the baron in the great
work of improvement solely because he was the most fashionable and
celebrated decorator of the day. The decorations of the boudoir had then
been left entirely to Madame Danglars and Lucien Debray. M. Danglars,
however, while possessing a great admiration for the antique, as it was
understood during the time of the Directory, entertained the most
sovereign contempt for the simple elegance of his wife's favorite
sitting-room, where, by the way, he was never permitted to intrude,
unless, indeed, he excused his own appearance by ushering in some more
agreeable visitor than himself; and even then he had rather the air and
manner of a person who was himself introduced, than that of being the
presenter of another, his reception being cordial or frigid, in
proportion as the person who accompanied him chanced to please or
displease the baroness.

Madame Danglars (who, although past the first bloom of youth, was still
strikingly handsome) was now seated at the piano, a most elaborate piece
of cabinet and inlaid work, while Lucien Debray, standing before a small
work-table, was turning over the pages of an album. Lucien had found
time, preparatory to the count's arrival, to relate many particulars
respecting him to Madame Danglars. It will be remembered that Monte
