"Then this young man escaped with you?"

"He did."

"In what way?"

"We were working at Saint-Mandrier, near Toulon. Do you know Saint-
Mandrier?"

"I do."

"In the hour of rest, between noon and one o'clock----"

"Galley-slaves having a nap after dinner! We may well pity the poor
fellows!" said the abbé.

"Nay," said Caderousse, "one can't always work--one is not a dog."

"So much the better for the dogs," said Monte Cristo.

"While the rest slept, then, we went away a short distance; we severed
our fetters with a file the Englishman had given us, and swam away."

"And what is become of this Benedetto?"

"I don't know."

"You ought to know."

"No, in truth; we parted at Hyères." And, to give more weight to his
protestation, Caderousse advanced another step towards the abbé, who
remained motionless in his place, as calm as ever, and pursuing his
interrogation. "You lie," said the Abbé Busoni, with a tone of
irresistible authority.

"Reverend sir!"

"You lie! This man is still your friend, and you, perhaps, make use of
him as your accomplice."


"Oh, reverend sir!"

"Since you left Toulon what have you lived on? Answer me!"

"On what I could get."

"You lie," repeated the abbé a third time, with a still more imperative
tone. Caderousse, terrified, looked at the count. "You have lived on the
money he has given you."

"True," said Caderousse; "Benedetto has become the son of a great lord."

"How can he be the son of a great lord?"

"A natural son."

"And what is that great lord's name?"

"The Count of Monte Cristo, the very same in whose house we are."

"Benedetto the count's son?" replied Monte Cristo, astonished in his
turn.

"Well, I should think so, since the count has found him a false father--
since the count gives him four thousand francs a month, and leaves him
500,000 francs in his will."

"Ah, yes," said the factitious abbé, who began to understand; "and what
name does the young man bear meanwhile?"

"Andrea Cavalcanti."

"Is it, then, that young man whom my friend the Count of Monte Cristo
has received into his house, and who is going to marry Mademoiselle
Danglars?"

"Exactly."

"And you suffer that, you wretch--you, who know his life and his crime?"

"Why should I stand in a comrade's way?" said Caderousse.

"You are right; it is not you who should apprise M. Danglars, it is I."

"Do not do so, reverend sir."

"Why not?"

"Because you would bring us to ruin."

"And you think that to save such villains as you I will become an
abettor of their plot, an accomplice in their crimes?"

"Reverend sir," said Caderousse, drawing still nearer.

"I will expose all."

"To whom?"

"To M. Danglars."

"By heaven!" cried Caderousse, drawing from his waistcoat an open knife,
and striking the count in the breast, "you shall disclose nothing,
reverend sir!" To Caderousse's great astonishment, the knife, instead of
piercing the count's breast, flew back blunted. At the same moment the
count seized with his left hand the assassin's wrist, and wrung it with
such strength that the knife fell from his stiffened fingers, and
Caderousse uttered a cry of pain. But the count, disregarding his cry,
continued to wring the bandit's wrist, until, his arm being dislocated,
he fell first on his knees, then flat on the floor. The count then
placed his foot on his head, saying, "I know not what restrains me from
crushing thy skull, rascal."


"Ah, mercy--mercy!" cried Caderousse. The count withdrew his foot.
"Rise!" said he. Caderousse rose.

"What a wrist you have, reverend sir!" said Caderousse, stroking his
arm, all bruised by the fleshy pincers which had held it; "what a
wrist!"

"Silence! God gives me strength to overcome a wild beast like you; in
the name of that God I act,--remember that, wretch,--and to spare thee
at this moment is still serving him."

"Oh!" said Caderousse, groaning with pain.

"Take this pen and paper, and write what I dictate."

"I don't know how to write, reverend sir."

"You lie! Take this pen, and write!" Caderousse, awed by the superior
power of the abbé, sat down and wrote:--

Sir,--The man whom you are receiving at your house, and to whom you
intend to marry your daughter, is a felon who escaped with me from
confinement at Toulon. He was No. 59, and I No. 58. He was called
Benedetto, but he is ignorant of his real name, having never known his
parents.

"Sign it!" continued the count.

"But would you ruin me?"

"If I sought your ruin, fool, I should drag you to the first guard-
house; besides, when that note is delivered, in all probability you will
have no more to fear. Sign it, then!"

Caderousse signed it. "The address, 'To monsieur the Baron Danglars,
banker, Rue de la Chaussée d'Antin.'" Caderousse wrote the address. The
abbé took the note. "Now," said he, "that suffices--begone!"

"Which way?"

"The way you came."

"You wish me to get out at that window?"

"You got in very well."

"Oh, you have some design against me, reverend sir."

"Idiot! what design can I have?"

"Why, then, not let me out by the door?"

"What would be the advantage of waking the porter?"

"Ah, reverend sir, tell me, do you wish me dead?"

"I wish what God wills."

"But swear that you will not strike me as I go down."

"Cowardly fool!"

"What do you intend doing with me?"

"I ask you what can I do? I have tried to make you a happy man, and you
have turned out a murderer."

"Oh, monsieur," said Caderousse, "make one more attempt--try me once
more!"

"I will," said the count. "Listen--you know if I may be relied on."

"Yes," said Caderousse.

"If you arrive safely at home----"

"What have I to fear, except from you?"

"If you reach your home safely, leave Paris, leave France, and wherever
you may be, so long as you conduct yourself well, I will send you a
small annuity; for, if you return home safely, then----"


"Then?" asked Caderousse, shuddering.

