mistaken as to the sincerity of his joy, and he saw that he had been
expected with impatience, and was received with pleasure. "Come, come,"
said Maximilian, "I will serve as your guide; such a man as you are
ought not to be introduced by a servant. My sister is in the garden
plucking the dead roses; my brother is reading his two papers, _la
Presse_ and _les Débats_, within six steps of her; for wherever you see
Madame Herbault, you have only to look within a circle of four yards and
you will find M. Emmanuel, and 'reciprocally,' as they say at the
Polytechnic School." At the sound of their steps a young woman of twenty
to five and twenty, dressed in a silk morning gown, and busily engaged
in plucking the dead leaves off a noisette rose-tree, raised her head.
This was Julie, who had become, as the clerk of the house of Thomson &
French had predicted, Madame Emmanuel Herbault. She uttered a cry of
surprise at the sight of a stranger, and Maximilian began to laugh.
"Don't disturb yourself, Julie," said he. "The count has only been two
or three days in Paris, but he already knows what a fashionable woman of
the Marais is, and if he does not, you will show him."

"Ah, monsieur," returned Julie, "it is treason in my brother to bring
you thus, but he never has any regard for his poor sister. Penelon,
Penelon!" An old man, who was digging busily at one of the beds, stuck
his spade in the earth, and approached, cap in hand, striving to conceal
a quid of tobacco he had just thrust into his cheek. A few locks of gray
mingled with his hair, which was still thick and matted, while his
bronzed features and determined glance well suited an old sailor who had
braved the heat of the equator and the storms of the tropics. "I think
you hailed me, Mademoiselle Julie?" said he. Penelon had still preserved
the habit of calling his master's daughter "Mademoiselle Julie," and had
never been able to change the name to Madame Herbault. "Penelon,"
replied Julie, "go and inform M. Emmanuel of this gentleman's visit, and
Maximilian will conduct him to the salon." Then, turning to Monte
Cristo,--"I hope you will permit me to leave you for a few minutes,"
continued she; and without awaiting any reply, disappeared behind a
clump of trees, and escaped to the house by a lateral alley.


"I am sorry to see," observed Monte Cristo to Morrel, "that I cause no
small disturbance in your house."

"Look there," said Maximilian, laughing; "there is her husband changing
his jacket for a coat. I assure you, you are well known in the Rue
Meslay."

"Your family appears to be a very happy one," said the count, as if
speaking to himself.

"Oh, yes, I assure you, count, they want nothing that can render them
happy; they are young and cheerful, they are tenderly attached to each
other, and with twenty-five thousand francs a year they fancy themselves
as rich as Rothschild."

"Five and twenty thousand francs is not a large sum, however," replied
Monte Cristo, with a tone so sweet and gentle, that it went to
Maximilian's heart like the voice of a father; "but they will not be
content with that. Your brother-in-law is a barrister? a doctor?"

"He was a merchant, monsieur, and had succeeded to the business of my
poor father. M. Morrel, at his death, left 500,000 francs, which were
divided between my sister and myself, for we were his only children. Her
husband, who, when he married her, had no other patrimony than his noble
probity, his first-rate ability, and his spotless reputation, wished to
possess as much as his wife. He labored and toiled until he had amassed
250,000 francs; six years sufficed to achieve this object. Oh, I assure
you, sir, it was a touching spectacle to see these young creatures,
destined by their talents for higher stations, toiling together, and
through their unwillingness to change any of the customs of their
paternal house, taking six years to accomplish what less scrupulous
people would have effected in two or three. Marseilles resounded with
their well-earned praises. At last, one day, Emmanuel came to his wife,
who had just finished making up the accounts. 'Julie,' said he to her,
'Cocles has just given me the last rouleau of a hundred francs; that
completes the 250,000 francs we had fixed as the limits of our gains.
Can you content yourself with the small fortune which we shall possess
for the future? Listen to me. Our house transacts business to the amount
of a million a year, from which we derive an income of 40,000 francs. We
can dispose of the business, if we please, in an hour, for I have
received a letter from M. Delaunay, in which he offers to purchase the
good-will of the house, to unite with his own, for 300,000 francs.
Advise me what I had better do.'--'Emmanuel,' returned my sister, 'the
house of Morrel can only be carried on by a Morrel. Is it not worth
300,000 francs to save our father's name from the chances of evil
fortune and failure?'--'I thought so,' replied Emmanuel; 'but I wished
to have your advice.'--'This is my counsel:--Our accounts are made up
and our bills paid; all we have to do is to stop the issue of any more,
and close our office.' This was done instantly. It was three o'clock; at
a quarter past, a merchant presented himself to insure two ships; it was
a clear profit of 15,000 francs. 'Monsieur,' said Emmanuel, 'have the
goodness to address yourself to M. Delaunay. We have quitted business.'-
-'How long?' inquired the astonished merchant. 'A quarter of an hour,'
was the reply. And this is the reason, monsieur," continued Maximilian,
"of my sister and brother-in-law having only 25,000 francs a year."


Maximilian had scarcely finished his story, during which the count's
heart had swelled within him, when Emmanuel entered wearing a hat and
coat. He saluted the count with the air of a man who is aware of the
rank of his guest; then, after having led Monte Cristo around the little
garden, he returned to the house. A large vase of Japan porcelain,
filled with flowers that loaded the air with their perfume, stood in the
salon. Julie, suitably dressed, and her hair arranged (she had
accomplished this feat in less than ten minutes), received the count on
his entrance. The songs of the birds were heard in an aviary hard by,
and the branches of laburnums and rose acacias formed an exquisite
framework to the blue velvet curtains. Everything in this charming
retreat, from the warble of the birds to the smile of the mistress,
breathed tranquillity and repose. The count had felt the influence of
this happiness from the moment he entered the house, and he remained
silent and pensive, forgetting that he was expected to renew the
conversation, which had ceased after the first salutations had been
exchanged. The silence became almost painful when, by a violent effort,
tearing himself from his pleasing reverie,

"Madame," said he at length, "I pray you to excuse my emotion, which
must astonish you who are only accustomed to the happiness I meet here;
but contentment is so new a sight to me, that I could never be weary of
looking at yourself and your husband."

"We are very happy, monsieur," replied Julie; "but we have also known
unhappiness, and few have ever undergone more bitter sufferings than
ourselves." The Count's features displayed an expression of the most
intense curiosity.

"Oh, all this is a family history, as Château-Renaud told you the other
day," observed Maximilian. "This humble picture would have but little
interest for you, accustomed as you are to behold the pleasures and the
misfortunes of the wealthy and industrious; but such as we are, we have
experienced bitter sorrows."

"And God has poured balm into your wounds, as he does into those of all
who are in affliction?" said Monte Cristo inquiringly.

"Yes, count," returned Julie, "we may indeed say he has, for he has done
for us what he grants only to his chosen; he sent us one of his angels."
The count's cheeks became scarlet, and he coughed, in order to have an
excuse for putting his handkerchief to his mouth. "Those born to wealth,
and who have the means of gratifying every wish," said Emmanuel, "know
not what is the real happiness of life, just as those who have been
tossed on the stormy waters of the ocean on a few frail planks can alone
realize the blessings of fair weather."

Monte Cristo rose, and without making any answer (for the tremulousness
of his voice would have betrayed his emotion) walked up and down the
apartment with a slow step.

"Our magnificence makes you smile, count," said Maximilian, who had
followed him with his eyes. "No, no," returned Monte Cristo, pale as
death, pressing one hand on his heart to still its throbbings, while
with the other he pointed to a crystal cover, beneath which a silken
purse lay on a black velvet cushion. "I was wondering what could be the
significance of this purse, with the paper at one end and the large
diamond at the other."

"Count," replied Maximilian, with an air of gravity, "those are our most
precious family treasures."

"The stone seems very brilliant," answered the count.

"Oh, my brother does not allude to its value, although it has been
estimated at 100,000 francs; he means, that the articles contained in
this purse are the relics of the angel I spoke of just now."

"This I do not comprehend; and yet I may not ask for an explanation,
madame," replied Monte Cristo bowing. "Pardon me, I had no intention of
committing an indiscretion."

"Indiscretion,--oh, you make us happy by giving us an excuse for
expatiating on this subject. If we wanted to conceal the noble action
this purse commemorates, we should not expose it thus to view. Oh, would
we could relate it everywhere, and to everyone, so that the emotion of
our unknown benefactor might reveal his presence."

"Ah, really," said Monte Cristo in a half-stifled voice.

"Monsieur," returned Maximilian, raising the glass cover, and
respectfully kissing the silken purse, "this has touched the hand of a
man who saved my father from suicide, us from ruin, and our name from
shame and disgrace,--a man by whose matchless benevolence we poor
children, doomed to want and wretchedness, can at present hear everyone
envying our happy lot. This letter" (as he spoke, Maximilian drew a
letter from the purse and gave it to the count)--"this letter was
written by him the day that my father had taken a desperate resolution,
and this diamond was given by the generous unknown to my sister as her
dowry." Monte Cristo opened the letter, and read it with an
indescribable feeling of delight. It was the letter written (as our
readers know) to Julie, and signed "Sinbad the Sailor."

"Unknown you say, is the man who rendered you this service--unknown to
you?"

"Yes; we have never had the happiness of pressing his hand," continued
Maximilian. "We have supplicated heaven in vain to grant us this favor,
but the whole affair has had a mysterious meaning that we cannot
comprehend--we have been guided by an invisible hand,--a hand as
powerful as that of an enchanter."

"Oh," cried Julie, "I have not lost all hope of some day kissing that
hand, as I now kiss the purse which he has touched. Four years ago,
Penelon was at Trieste--Penelon, count, is the old sailor you saw in the
garden, and who, from quartermaster, has become gardener--Penelon, when
he was at Trieste, saw on the quay an Englishman, who was on the point
