"No."

"Was it M. de Villefort?"

"No."

"Madame?"

"No."

"It was your granddaughter, then, was it not?"

"Yes." A groan from Barrois, accompanied by a yawn which seemed to crack
the very jawbones, attracted the attention of M. d'Avrigny; he left M.
Noirtier, and returned to the sick man. "Barrois," said the doctor, "can
you speak?" Barrois muttered a few unintelligible words. "Try and make
an effort to do so, my good man." said d'Avrigny. Barrois reopened his
bloodshot eyes. "Who made the lemonade?"

"I did."

"Did you bring it to your master directly it was made?"

"No."

"You left it somewhere, then, in the meantime?"

"Yes; I left it in the pantry, because I was called away."

"Who brought it into this room, then?"

"Mademoiselle Valentine." D'Avrigny struck his forehead with his hand.
"Gracious heaven," exclaimed he. "Doctor, doctor!" cried Barrois, who
felt another fit coming.

"Will they never bring that emetic?" asked the doctor.

"Here is a glass with one already prepared," said Villefort, entering
the room.

"Who prepared it?"

"The chemist who came here with me."


"Drink it," said the doctor to Barrois. "Impossible, doctor; it is too
late; my throat is closing up. I am choking! Oh, my heart! Ah, my head!-
-Oh, what agony!--Shall I suffer like this long?"

"No, no, friend," replied the doctor, "you will soon cease to suffer."

"Ah, I understand you," said the unhappy man. "My God, have mercy upon
me!" and, uttering a fearful cry, Barrois fell back as if he had been
struck by lightning. D'Avrigny put his hand to his heart, and placed a
glass before his lips.

"Well?" said Villefort. "Go to the kitchen and get me some syrup of
violets." Villefort went immediately. "Do not be alarmed, M. Noirtier,"
said d'Avrigny; "I am going to take my patient into the next room to
bleed him; this sort of attack is very frightful to witness."

And taking Barrois under the arms, he dragged him into an adjoining
room; but almost immediately he returned to fetch the lemonade. Noirtier
closed his right eye. "You want Valentine, do you not? I will tell them
to send her to you." Villefort returned, and d'Avrigny met him in the
passage. "Well, how is he now?" asked he. "Come in here," said
d'Avrigny, and he took him into the chamber where the sick man lay. "Is
he still in a fit?" said the procureur.

"He is dead."

Villefort drew back a few steps, and, clasping his hands, exclaimed,
with real amazement and sympathy, "Dead?--and so soon too!"

"Yes, it is very soon," said the doctor, looking at the corpse before
him; "but that ought not to astonish you; Monsieur and Madame de Saint-
Méran died as soon. People die very suddenly in your house, M. de
Villefort."

"What?" cried the magistrate, with an accent of horror and
consternation, "are you still harping on that terrible idea?"

"Still, sir; and I shall always do so," replied d'Avrigny, "for it has
never for one instant ceased to retain possession of my mind; and that
you may be quite sure I am not mistaken this time, listen well to what I
am going to say, M. de Villefort." The magistrate trembled convulsively.
"There is a poison which destroys life almost without leaving any
perceptible traces. I know it well; I have studied it in all its forms
and in the effects which it produces. I recognized the presence of this
poison in the case of poor Barrois as well as in that of Madame de
Saint-Méran. There is a way of detecting its presence. It restores the
blue color of litmus-paper reddened by an acid, and it turns syrup of
violets green. We have no litmus-paper, but, see, here they come with
the syrup of violets."

The doctor was right; steps were heard in the passage. M. d'Avrigny
opened the door, and took from the hands of the chambermaid a cup which
contained two or three spoonfuls of the syrup, he then carefully closed
the door. "Look," said he to the procureur, whose heart beat so loudly
that it might almost be heard, "here is in this cup some syrup of
violets, and this decanter contains the remainder of the lemonade of
which M. Noirtier and Barrois partook. If the lemonade be pure and
inoffensive, the syrup will retain its color; if, on the contrary, the
lemonade be drugged with poison, the syrup will become green. Look
closely!"

The doctor then slowly poured some drops of the lemonade from the
decanter into the cup, and in an instant a light cloudy sediment began
to form at the bottom of the cup; this sediment first took a blue shade,
then from the color of sapphire it passed to that of opal, and from opal
to emerald. Arrived at this last hue, it changed no more. The result of
the experiment left no doubt whatever on the mind.

"The unfortunate Barrois has been poisoned," said d'Avrigny, "and I will
maintain this assertion before God and man." Villefort said nothing, but
he clasped his hands, opened his haggard eyes, and, overcome with his
emotion, sank into a chair.



Chapter 80. The Accusation

M. D'Avrigny soon restored the magistrate to consciousness, who had
looked like a second corpse in that chamber of death. "Oh, death is in
my house!" cried Villefort.

"Say, rather, crime!" replied the doctor.

"M. d'Avrigny," cried Villefort, "I cannot tell you all I feel at this
moment,--terror, grief, madness."

"Yes," said M. d'Avrigny, with an imposing calmness, "but I think it is
now time to act. I think it is time to stop this torrent of mortality. I
can no longer bear to be in possession of these secrets without the hope
of seeing the victims and society generally revenged." Villefort cast a
gloomy look around him. "In my house," murmured he, "in my house!"

"Come, magistrate," said M. d'Avrigny, "show yourself a man; as an
interpreter of the law, do honor to your profession by sacrificing your
selfish interests to it."

"You make me shudder, doctor. Do you talk of a sacrifice?"

"I do."

"Do you then suspect anyone?"

"I suspect no one; death raps at your door--it enters--it goes, not
blindfolded, but circumspectly, from room to room. Well, I follow its
course, I track its passage; I adopt the wisdom of the ancients, and
feel my way, for my friendship for your family and my respect for you
are as a twofold bandage over my eyes; well----"

"Oh, speak, speak, doctor; I shall have courage."

"Well, sir, you have in your establishment, or in your family, perhaps,
one of the frightful monstrosities of which each century produces only
one. Locusta and Agrippina, living at the same time, were an exception,
and proved the determination of Providence to effect the entire ruin of
the Roman empire, sullied by so many crimes. Brunhilda and Fredegund
were the results of the painful struggle of civilization in its infancy,
when man was learning to control mind, were it even by an emissary from
the realms of darkness. All these women had been, or were, beautiful.
The same flower of innocence had flourished, or was still flourishing,
on their brow, that is seen on the brow of the culprit in your house."
Villefort shrieked, clasped his hands, and looked at the doctor with a
supplicating air. But the latter went on without pity:--


"'Seek whom the crime will profit,' says an axiom of jurisprudence."

"Doctor," cried Villefort, "alas, doctor, how often has man's justice
been deceived by those fatal words. I know not why, but I feel that this
crime----"

"You acknowledge, then, the existence of the crime?"

"Yes, I see too plainly that it does exist. But it seems that it is
intended to affect me personally. I fear an attack myself, after all
these disasters."

"Oh, man," murmured d'Avrigny, "the most selfish of all animals, the
most personal of all creatures, who believes the earth turns, the sun
shines, and death strikes for him alone,--an ant cursing God from the
top of a blade of grass! And have those who have lost their lives lost
nothing?--M. de Saint-Méran, Madame de Saint-Méran, M. Noirtier----"

"How? M. Noirtier?"

"Yes; think you it was the poor servant's life was coveted? No, no; like
Shakespeare's 'Polonius,' he died for another. It was Noirtier the
lemonade was intended for--it is Noirtier, logically speaking, who drank
it. The other drank it only by accident, and, although Barrois is dead,
it was Noirtier whose death was wished for."

"But why did it not kill my father?"

"I told you one evening in the garden after Madame de Saint-Méran's
death--because his system is accustomed to that very poison, and the
dose was trifling to him, which would be fatal to another; because no
