"Well, what good wind blows you hither at this hour?" said he; "have you
come to sup with me? It would be very kind of you."

"No; I have come to speak to you of a very serious matter."

"A serious matter," said the count, looking at Franz with the
earnestness usual to him; "and what may it be?"

"Are we alone?"

"Yes," replied the count, going to the door, and returning. Franz gave
him Albert's letter.

"Read that," he said.

The count read it.

"Well, well!" said he.

"Did you see the postscript?"

"I did, indeed.

"_'Se alle sei della mattina le quattro mile piastre non sono nelle mie
mani, alla sette il conte Alberto avrà cessato di vivere.

"'Luigi Vampa.'_"

"What think you of that?" inquired Franz.

"Have you the money he demands?"

"Yes, all but eight hundred piastres."

The count went to his _secrétaire_, opened it, and pulling out a drawer
filled with gold, said to Franz, "I hope you will not offend me by
applying to anyone but myself."

"You see, on the contrary, I come to you first and instantly," replied
Franz.

"And I thank you; have what you will;" and he made a sign to Franz to
take what he pleased.

"Is it absolutely necessary, then, to send the money to Luigi Vampa?"
asked the young man, looking fixedly in his turn at the count.

"Judge for yourself," replied he. "The postscript is explicit."

"I think that if you would take the trouble of reflecting, you could
find a way of simplifying the negotiation," said Franz.

"How so?" returned the count, with surprise.

"If we were to go together to Luigi Vampa, I am sure he would not refuse
you Albert's freedom."

"What influence can I possibly have over a bandit?"

"Have you not just rendered him a service that can never be forgotten?"

"What is that?"

"Have you not saved Peppino's life?"

"Well, well," said the count, "who told you that?"

"No matter; I know it." The count knit his brows, and remained silent an
instant.

"And if I went to seek Vampa, would you accompany me?"

"If my society would not be disagreeable."

"Be it so. It is a lovely night, and a walk without Rome will do us both
good."

"Shall I take any arms?"

"For what purpose?"

"Any money?"

"It is useless. Where is the man who brought the letter?"

"In the street."

"He awaits the answer?"

"Yes."

"I must learn where we are going. I will summon him hither."

"It is useless; he would not come up."

"To your apartments, perhaps; but he will not make any difficulty at
entering mine." The count went to the window of the apartment that
looked on to the street, and whistled in a peculiar manner. The man in
the mantle quitted the wall, and advanced into the middle of the street.
"_Salite!_" said the count, in the same tone in which he would have
given an order to his servant. The messenger obeyed without the least
hesitation, but rather with alacrity, and, mounting the steps at a
bound, entered the hotel; five seconds afterwards he was at the door of
the room.

"Ah, it is you, Peppino," said the count. But Peppino, instead of
answering, threw himself on his knees, seized the count's hand, and
covered it with kisses. "Ah," said the count, "you have, then, not
forgotten that I saved your life; that is strange, for it is a week
ago."


"No, excellency; and never shall I forget it," returned Peppino, with an
accent of profound gratitude.

"Never? That is a long time; but it is something that you believe so.
Rise and answer." Peppino glanced anxiously at Franz. "Oh, you may speak
before his excellency," said he; "he is one of my friends. You allow me
to give you this title?" continued the count in French, "it is necessary
to excite this man's confidence."

"You can speak before me," said Franz; "I am a friend of the count's."

"Good!" returned Peppino. "I am ready to answer any questions your
excellency may address to me."

"How did the Viscount Albert fall into Luigi's hands?"

"Excellency, the Frenchman's carriage passed several times the one in
which was Teresa."

"The chief's mistress?"

"Yes. The Frenchman threw her a bouquet; Teresa returned it--all this
with the consent of the chief, who was in the carriage."

"What?" cried Franz, "was Luigi Vampa in the carriage with the Roman
peasants?"

"It was he who drove, disguised as the coachman," replied Peppino.

"Well?" said the count.

"Well, then, the Frenchman took off his mask; Teresa, with the chief's
consent, did the same. The Frenchman asked for a rendezvous; Teresa gave
him one--only, instead of Teresa, it was Beppo who was on the steps of
the church of San Giacomo."

"What!" exclaimed Franz, "the peasant girl who snatched his _mocoletto_
from him----"

"Was a lad of fifteen," replied Peppino. "But it was no disgrace to your
friend to have been deceived; Beppo has taken in plenty of others."

"And Beppo led him outside the walls?" said the count.

"Exactly so; a carriage was waiting at the end of the Via Macello. Beppo
got in, inviting the Frenchman to follow him, and he did not wait to be
asked twice. He gallantly offered the right-hand seat to Beppo, and sat
by him. Beppo told him he was going to take him to a villa a league from
Rome; the Frenchman assured him he would follow him to the end of the
world. The coachman went up the Via di Ripetta and the Porta San Paolo;
and when they were two hundred yards outside, as the Frenchman became
somewhat too forward, Beppo put a brace of pistols to his head, the
coachman pulled up and did the same. At the same time, four of the band,
who were concealed on the banks of the Almo, surrounded the carriage.
The Frenchman made some resistance, and nearly strangled Beppo; but he
could not resist five armed men, and was forced to yield. They made him
get out, walk along the banks of the river, and then brought him to
Teresa and Luigi, who were waiting for him in the catacombs of St.
Sebastian."

"Well," said the count, turning towards Franz, "it seems to me that this
is a very likely story. What do you say to it?"

"Why, that I should think it very amusing," replied Franz, "if it had
happened to anyone but poor Albert."

"And, in truth, if you had not found me here," said the count, "it might
have proved a gallant adventure which would have cost your friend dear;
but now, be assured, his alarm will be the only serious consequence."

"And shall we go and find him?" inquired Franz.

"Oh, decidedly, sir. He is in a very picturesque place--do you know the
catacombs of St. Sebastian?"

"I was never in them; but I have often resolved to visit them."

"Well, here is an opportunity made to your hand, and it would be
difficult to contrive a better. Have you a carriage?"

"No."

"That is of no consequence; I always have one ready, day and night."

"Always ready?"

"Yes. I am a very capricious being, and I should tell you that sometimes
when I rise, or after my dinner, or in the middle of the night, I
