Morcerf."

"Mademoiselle Danglars' fortune will be great, no doubt, especially if
the telegraph should not make any more mistakes."

"Oh, I do not mean her fortune only; but tell me----"

"What?"

"Why did you not invite M. and Madame de Morcerf to your dinner?"

"I did so, but he excused himself on account of Madame de Morcerf being
obliged to go to Dieppe for the benefit of sea air."

"Yes, yes," said Danglars, laughing, "it would do her a great deal of
good."

"Why so?"

"Because it is the air she always breathed in her youth." Monte Cristo
took no notice of this ill-natured remark.

"But still, if Albert be not so rich as Mademoiselle Danglars," said the
count, "you must allow that he has a fine name?"

"So he has; but I like mine as well."

"Certainly; your name is popular, and does honor to the title they have
adorned it with; but you are too intelligent not to know that according
to a prejudice, too firmly rooted to be exterminated, a nobility which
dates back five centuries is worth more than one that can only reckon
twenty years."

"And for this very reason," said Danglars with a smile, which he tried
to make sardonic, "I prefer M. Andrea Cavalcanti to M. Albert de
Morcerf."

"Still, I should not think the Morcerfs would yield to the Cavalcanti?"

"The Morcerfs!--Stay, my dear count," said Danglars; "you are a man of
the world, are you not?"

"I think so."

"And you understand heraldry?"

"A little."

"Well, look at my coat-of-arms, it is worth more than Morcerf's."

"Why so?"

"Because, though I am not a baron by birth, my real name is, at least,
Danglars."

"Well, what then?"

"While his name is not Morcerf."

"How?--not Morcerf?"

"Not the least in the world."

"Go on."

"I have been made a baron, so that I actually am one; he made himself a
count, so that he is not one at all."

"Impossible!"

"Listen my dear count; M. de Morcerf has been my friend, or rather my
acquaintance, during the last thirty years. You know I have made the
most of my arms, though I never forgot my origin."

"A proof of great humility or great pride," said Monte Cristo.

"Well, when I was a clerk, Morcerf was a mere fisherman."

"And then he was called----"

"Fernand."

"Only Fernand?"

"Fernand Mondego."

"You are sure?"

"_Pardieu!_ I have bought enough fish of him to know his name."

"Then, why did you think of giving your daughter to him?"

"Because Fernand and Danglars, being both parvenus, both having become
noble, both rich, are about equal in worth, excepting that there have
been certain things mentioned of him that were never said of me."

"What?"

"Oh, nothing!"

"Ah, yes; what you tell me recalls to mind something about the name of
Fernand Mondego. I have heard that name in Greece."

"In conjunction with the affairs of Ali Pasha?"

"Exactly so."

"This is the mystery," said Danglars. "I acknowledge I would have given
anything to find it out."

"It would be very easy if you much wished it?"

"How so?"

"Probably you have some correspondent in Greece?"

"I should think so."

"At Yanina?"

"Everywhere."

"Well, write to your correspondent in Yanina, and ask him what part was
played by a Frenchman named Fernand Mondego in the catastrophe of Ali
Tepelini."

"You are right," exclaimed Danglars, rising quickly, "I will write
today."

"Do so."

"I will."


"And if you should hear of anything very scandalous----"

"I will communicate it to you."

"You will oblige me." Danglars rushed out of the room, and made but one
leap into his _coupé_.



Chapter 67. The Office of the King's Attorney

Let us leave the banker driving his horses at their fullest speed, and
follow Madame Danglars in her morning excursion. We have said that at
half-past twelve o'clock Madame Danglars had ordered her horses, and had
left home in the carriage. She directed her course towards the Faubourg
Saint Germain, went down the Rue Mazarine, and stopped at the Passage du
Pont-Neuf. She descended, and went through the passage. She was very
plainly dressed, as would be the case with a woman of taste walking in
the morning. At the Rue Guénégaud she called a cab, and directed the
driver to go to the Rue de Harlay. As soon as she was seated in the
vehicle, she drew from her pocket a very thick black veil, which she
tied on to her straw bonnet. She then replaced the bonnet, and saw with
pleasure, in a little pocket-mirror, that her white complexion and
brilliant eyes were alone visible. The cab crossed the Pont-Neuf and
entered the Rue de Harlay by the Place Dauphiné; the driver was paid as
the door opened, and stepping lightly up the stairs Madame Danglars soon
reached the Salle des Pas-Perdus.

There was a great deal going on that morning, and many business-like
persons at the Palais; business-like persons pay very little attention
to women, and Madame Danglars crossed the hall without exciting any more
attention than any other woman calling upon her lawyer. There was a
great press of people in M. de Villefort's antechamber, but Madame
Danglars had no occasion even to pronounce her name. The instant she
appeared the door-keeper rose, came to her, and asked her whether she
was not the person with whom the procureur had made an appointment; and
on her affirmative answer being given, he conducted her by a private
passage to M. de Villefort's office. The magistrate was seated in an
armchair, writing, with his back towards the door; he did not move as he
heard it open, and the door-keeper pronounce the words, "Walk in,
madame," and then reclose it; but no sooner had the man's footsteps
ceased, than he started up, drew the bolts, closed the curtains, and
examined every corner of the room. Then, when he had assured himself
that he could neither be seen nor heard, and was consequently relieved
of doubts, he said,--"Thanks, madame,--thanks for your punctuality;" and
he offered a chair to Madame Danglars, which she accepted, for her heart
beat so violently that she felt nearly suffocated.


"It is a long time, madame," said the procureur, describing a half-
circle with his chair, so as to place himself exactly opposite to Madame
Danglars,--"it is a long time since I had the pleasure of speaking alone
with you, and I regret that we have only now met to enter upon a painful
conversation."

"Nevertheless, sir, you see I have answered your first appeal, although
certainly the conversation must be much more painful for me than for
you." Villefort smiled bitterly.

"It is true, then," he said, rather uttering his thoughts aloud than
addressing his companion,--"it is true, then, that all our actions leave
their traces--some sad, others bright--on our paths; it is true that
every step in our lives is like the course of an insect on the sands;--
it leaves its track! Alas, to many the path is traced by tears."

"Sir," said Madame Danglars, "you can feel for my emotion, can you not?
