death would cause the wedding to be postponed indefinitely.

"But what redoubles my sorrow," continued the young girl, as if this
feeling was to receive its immediate punishment, "is that the poor old
lady, on her death-bed, requested that the marriage might take place as
soon as possible; she also, thinking to protect me, was acting against
me."

"Hark!" said Morrel. They both listened; steps were distinctly heard in
the corridor and on the stairs.

"It is my father, who has just left his study."

"To accompany the doctor to the door," added Morrel.

"How do you know it is the doctor?" asked Valentine, astonished.

"I imagined it must be," said Morrel. Valentine looked at the young man;
they heard the street door close, then M. de Villefort locked the garden
door, and returned upstairs. He stopped a moment in the anteroom, as if
hesitating whether to turn to his own apartment or into Madame de Saint-
Méran's; Morrel concealed himself behind a door; Valentine remained
motionless, grief seeming to deprive her of all fear. M. de Villefort
passed on to his own room. "Now," said Valentine, "you can neither go
out by the front door nor by the garden." Morrel looked at her with
astonishment. "There is but one way left you that is safe," said she;
"it is through my grandfather's room." She rose, "Come," she added.

"Where?" asked Maximilian.

"To my grandfather's room."

"I in M. Noirtier's apartment?"

"Yes."

"Can you mean it, Valentine?"

"I have long wished it; he is my only remaining friend and we both need
his help,--come."

"Be careful, Valentine," said Morrel, hesitating to comply with the
young girl's wishes; "I now see my error--I acted like a madman in
coming in here. Are you sure you are more reasonable?"

"Yes," said Valentine; "and I have but one scruple,--that of leaving my
dear grandmother's remains, which I had undertaken to watch."

"Valentine," said Morrel, "death is in itself sacred."

"Yes," said Valentine; "besides, it will not be for long." She then
crossed the corridor, and led the way down a narrow staircase to M.
Noirtier's room; Morrel followed her on tiptoe; at the door they found
the old servant. "Barrois," said Valentine, "shut the door, and let no
one come in." She passed first. Noirtier, seated in his chair, and
listening to every sound, was watching the door; he saw Valentine, and
his eye brightened. There was something grave and solemn in the approach
of the young girl which struck the old man, and immediately his bright
eye began to interrogate. "Dear grandfather." said she hurriedly, "you
know poor grandmamma died an hour since, and now I have no friend in the
world but you." His expressive eyes evinced the greatest tenderness. "To
you alone, then, may I confide my sorrows and my hopes?" The paralytic
motioned "Yes." Valentine took Maximilian's hand. "Look attentively,
then, at this gentleman." The old man fixed his scrutinizing gaze with
slight astonishment on Morrel. "It is M. Maximilian Morrel," said she;
"the son of that good merchant of Marseilles, whom you doubtless
recollect."

"Yes," said the old man. "He brings an irreproachable name, which
Maximilian is likely to render glorious, since at thirty years of age he
is a captain, an officer of the Legion of Honor." The old man signified
that he recollected him. "Well, grandpapa," said Valentine, kneeling
before him, and pointing to Maximilian, "I love him, and will be only
his; were I compelled to marry another, I would destroy myself."

The eyes of the paralytic expressed a multitude of tumultuous thoughts.
"You like M. Maximilian Morrel, do you not, grandpapa?" asked Valentine.

"Yes."

"And you will protect us, who are your children, against the will of my
father?"--Noirtier cast an intelligent glance at Morrel, as if to say,
"perhaps I may." Maximilian understood him.

"Mademoiselle," said he, "you have a sacred duty to fulfil in your
deceased grandmother's room, will you allow me the honor of a few
minutes' conversation with M. Noirtier?"

"That is it," said the old man's eye. Then he looked anxiously at
Valentine.

"Do you fear he will not understand?"

"Yes."

"Oh, we have so often spoken of you, that he knows exactly how I talk to
you." Then turning to Maximilian, with an adorable smile; although
shaded by sorrow,--"He knows everything I know," said she.

Valentine arose, placed a chair for Morrel, requested Barrois not to
admit anyone, and having tenderly embraced her grandfather, and
sorrowfully taken leave of Morrel, she went away. To prove to Noirtier
that he was in Valentine's confidence and knew all their secrets, Morrel
took the dictionary, a pen, and some paper, and placed them all on a
table where there was a light.

"But first," said Morrel, "allow me, sir, to tell you who I am, how much
I love Mademoiselle Valentine, and what are my designs respecting her."
Noirtier made a sign that he would listen.

It was an imposing sight to witness this old man, apparently a mere
useless burden, becoming the sole protector, support, and adviser of the
lovers who were both young, beautiful, and strong. His remarkably noble
and austere expression struck Morrel, who began his story with
trembling. He related the manner in which he had become acquainted with
Valentine, and how he had loved her, and that Valentine, in her solitude
and her misfortune, had accepted the offer of his devotion. He told him
his birth, his position, his fortune, and more than once, when he
consulted the look of the paralytic, that look answered, "That is good,
proceed."

"And now," said Morrel, when he had finished the first part of his
recital, "now I have told you of my love and my hopes, may I inform you
of my intentions?"

"Yes," signified the old man.

"This was our resolution; a cabriolet was in waiting at the gate, in
which I intended to carry off Valentine to my sister's house, to marry
her, and to wait respectfully M. de Villefort's pardon."

"No," said Noirtier.

"We must not do so?"

"No."

"You do not sanction our project?"

"No."

"There is another way," said Morrel. The old man's interrogative eye
said, "What?"

"I will go," continued Maximilian, "I will seek M. Franz d'Epinay--I am
happy to be able to mention this in Mademoiselle de Villefort's absence-
-and will conduct myself toward him so as to compel him to challenge
me." Noirtier's look continued to interrogate. "You wish to know what I
will do?"

"Yes."

"I will find him, as I told you. I will tell him the ties which bind me
to Mademoiselle Valentine; if he be a sensible man, he will prove it by
renouncing of his own accord the hand of his betrothed, and will secure
my friendship, and love until death; if he refuse, either through
interest or ridiculous pride, after I have proved to him that he would
be forcing my wife from me, that Valentine loves me, and will have no
other, I will fight with him, give him every advantage, and I shall kill
him, or he will kill me; if I am victorious, he will not marry
Valentine, and if I die, I am very sure Valentine will not marry him."
Noirtier watched, with indescribable pleasure, this noble and sincere
countenance, on which every sentiment his tongue uttered was depicted,
adding by the expression of his fine features all that coloring adds to
a sound and faithful drawing. Still, when Morrel had finished, he shut
his eyes several times, which was his manner of saying "No."

"No?" said Morrel; "you disapprove of this second project, as you did of
the first?"

"I do," signified the old man.

"But what then must be done?" asked Morrel. "Madame de Saint-Méran's
last request was, that the marriage might not be delayed; must I let
things take their course?" Noirtier did not move. "I understand," said
Morrel; "I am to wait."

"Yes."

"But delay may ruin our plan, sir," replied the young man. "Alone,
Valentine has no power; she will be compelled to submit. I am here
almost miraculously, and can scarcely hope for so good an opportunity to
occur again. Believe me, there are only the two plans I have proposed to
you; forgive my vanity, and tell me which you prefer. Do you authorize
Mademoiselle Valentine to intrust herself to my honor?"

"No."

"Do you prefer I should seek M. d'Epinay?"

"No."

"Whence then will come the help we need--from chance?" resumed Morrel.

"No."

"From you?"

"Yes."

