I feel eagle's wings springing out at my shoulders, and with those wings
I could make a tour of the world in four and twenty hours."

"Ah, yes, the hashish is beginning its work. Well, unfurl your wings,
and fly into superhuman regions; fear nothing, there is a watch over
you; and if your wings, like those of Icarus, melt before the sun, we
are here to ease your fall." He then said something in Arabic to Ali,
who made a sign of obedience and withdrew, but not to any distance.

As to Franz a strange transformation had taken place in him. All the
bodily fatigue of the day, all the preoccupation of mind which the
events of the evening had brought on, disappeared as they do at the
first approach of sleep, when we are still sufficiently conscious to be
aware of the coming of slumber. His body seemed to acquire an airy
lightness, his perception brightened in a remarkable manner, his senses
seemed to redouble their power, the horizon continued to expand; but it
was not the gloomy horizon of vague alarms, and which he had seen before
he slept, but a blue, transparent, unbounded horizon, with all the blue
of the ocean, all the spangles of the sun, all the perfumes of the
summer breeze; then, in the midst of the songs of his sailors,--songs so
clear and sonorous, that they would have made a divine harmony had their
notes been taken down,--he saw the Island of Monte Cristo, no longer as
a threatening rock in the midst of the waves, but as an oasis in the
desert; then, as his boat drew nearer, the songs became louder, for an
enchanting and mysterious harmony rose to heaven, as if some Loreley had
decreed to attract a soul thither, or Amphion, the enchanter, intended
there to build a city.

At length the boat touched the shore, but without effort, without shock,
as lips touch lips; and he entered the grotto amidst continued strains
of most delicious melody. He descended, or rather seemed to descend,
several steps, inhaling the fresh and balmy air, like that which may be
supposed to reign around the grotto of Circe, formed from such perfumes
as set the mind a-dreaming, and such fires as burn the very senses; and
he saw again all he had seen before his sleep, from Sinbad, his singular
host, to Ali, the mute attendant; then all seemed to fade away and
become confused before his eyes, like the last shadows of the magic
lantern before it is extinguished, and he was again in the chamber of
statues, lighted only by one of those pale and antique lamps which watch
in the dead of the night over the sleep of pleasure.

They were the same statues, rich in form, in attraction, and poesy, with
eyes of fascination, smiles of love, and bright and flowing hair. They
were Phryne, Cleopatra, Messalina, those three celebrated courtesans.
Then among them glided like a pure ray, like a Christian angel in the
midst of Olympus, one of those chaste figures, those calm shadows, those
soft visions, which seemed to veil its virgin brow before these marble
wantons.

Then the three statues advanced towards him with looks of love, and
approached the couch on which he was reposing, their feet hidden in
their long white tunics, their throats bare, hair flowing like waves,
and assuming attitudes which the gods could not resist, but which saints
withstood, and looks inflexible and ardent like those with which the
serpent charms the bird; and then he gave way before looks that held him
in a torturing grasp and delighted his senses as with a voluptuous kiss.

It seemed to Franz that he closed his eyes, and in a last look about him
saw the vision of modesty completely veiled; and then followed a dream
of passion like that promised by the Prophet to the elect. Lips of stone
turned to flame, breasts of ice became like heated lava, so that to
Franz, yielding for the first time to the sway of the drug, love was a
sorrow and voluptuousness a torture, as burning mouths were pressed to
his thirsty lips, and he was held in cool serpent-like embraces. The
more he strove against this unhallowed passion the more his senses
yielded to its thrall, and at length, weary of a struggle that taxed his
very soul, he gave way and sank back breathless and exhausted beneath
the kisses of these marble goddesses, and the enchantment of his
marvellous dream.



Chapter 32. The Waking

When Franz returned to himself, he seemed still to be in a dream. He
thought himself in a sepulchre, into which a ray of sunlight in pity
scarcely penetrated. He stretched forth his hand, and touched stone; he
rose to his seat, and found himself lying on his bournous in a bed of
dry heather, very soft and odoriferous. The vision had fled; and as if
the statues had been but shadows from the tomb, they had vanished at his
waking.

He advanced several paces towards the point whence the light came, and
to all the excitement of his dream succeeded the calmness of reality. He
found that he was in a grotto, went towards the opening, and through a
kind of fanlight saw a blue sea and an azure sky. The air and water were
shining in the beams of the morning sun; on the shore the sailors were
sitting, chatting and laughing; and at ten yards from them the boat was
at anchor, undulating gracefully on the water.

There for some time he enjoyed the fresh breeze which played on his
brow, and listened to the dash of the waves on the beach, that left
against the rocks a lace of foam as white as silver. He was for some
time without reflection or thought for the divine charm which is in the
things of nature, specially after a fantastic dream; then gradually this
view of the outer world, so calm, so pure, so grand, reminded him of the
illusiveness of his vision, and once more awakened memory. He recalled
his arrival on the island, his presentation to a smuggler chief, a
subterranean palace full of splendor, an excellent supper, and a
spoonful of hashish.

It seemed, however, even in the very face of open day, that at least a
year had elapsed since all these things had passed, so deep was the
impression made in his mind by the dream, and so strong a hold had it
taken of his imagination. Thus every now and then he saw in fancy amid
the sailors, seated on a rock, or undulating in the vessel, one of the
shadows which had shared his dream with looks and kisses. Otherwise, his
head was perfectly clear, and his body refreshed; he was free from the
slightest headache; on the contrary, he felt a certain degree of
lightness, a faculty for absorbing the pure air, and enjoying the bright
sunshine more vividly than ever.

He went gayly up to the sailors, who rose as soon as they perceived him;
and the patron, accosting him, said, "The Signor Sinbad has left his
compliments for your excellency, and desires us to express the regret he
feels at not being able to take his leave in person; but he trusts you
will excuse him, as very important business calls him to Malaga."

"So, then, Gaetano," said Franz, "this is, then, all reality; there
exists a man who has received me in this island, entertained me right
royally, and has departed while I was asleep?"

"He exists as certainly as that you may see his small yacht with all her
sails spread; and if you will use your glass, you will, in all
probability, recognize your host in the midst of his crew."

So saying, Gaetano pointed in a direction in which a small vessel was
making sail towards the southern point of Corsica. Franz adjusted his
telescope, and directed it towards the yacht. Gaetano was not mistaken.
At the stern the mysterious stranger was standing up looking towards the
shore, and holding a spy-glass in his hand. He was attired as he had
been on the previous evening, and waved his pocket-handkerchief to his
guest in token of adieu. Franz returned the salute by shaking his
handkerchief as an exchange of signals. After a second, a slight cloud
of smoke was seen at the stern of the vessel, which rose gracefully as
it expanded in the air, and then Franz heard a slight report.

"There, do you hear?" observed Gaetano; "he is bidding you adieu."

The young man took his carbine and fired it in the air, but without any
idea that the noise could be heard at the distance which separated the
yacht from the shore.

"What are your excellency's orders?" inquired Gaetano.

"In the first place, light me a torch."

"Ah, yes, I understand," replied the patron, "to find the entrance to
the enchanted apartment. With much pleasure, your excellency, if it
would amuse you; and I will get you the torch you ask for. But I too
have had the idea you have, and two or three times the same fancy has
come over me; but I have always given it up. Giovanni, light a torch,"
he added, "and give it to his excellency."

Giovanni obeyed. Franz took the lamp, and entered the subterranean
grotto, followed by Gaetano. He recognized the place where he had awaked
by the bed of heather that was there; but it was in vain that he carried
his torch all round the exterior surface of the grotto. He saw nothing,
unless that, by traces of smoke, others had before him attempted the
same thing, and, like him, in vain. Yet he did not leave a foot of this
granite wall, as impenetrable as futurity, without strict scrutiny; he
did not see a fissure without introducing the blade of his hunting sword
into it, or a projecting point on which he did not lean and press in the
hopes it would give way. All was vain; and he lost two hours in his
attempts, which were at last utterly useless. At the end of this time he
gave up his search, and Gaetano smiled.

When Franz appeared again on the shore, the yacht only seemed like a
small white speck on the horizon. He looked again through his glass, but
even then he could not distinguish anything.

Gaetano reminded him that he had come for the purpose of shooting goats,
which he had utterly forgotten. He took his fowling-piece, and began to
hunt over the island with the air of a man who is fulfilling a duty,
rather than enjoying a pleasure; and at the end of a quarter of an hour
he had killed a goat and two kids. These animals, though wild and agile
as chamois, were too much like domestic goats, and Franz could not
consider them as game. Moreover, other ideas, much more enthralling,
occupied his mind. Since, the evening before, he had really been the
hero of one of the tales of the _Thousand and One Nights_, and he was
irresistibly attracted towards the grotto.

Then, in spite of the failure of his first search, he began a second,
after having told Gaetano to roast one of the two kids. The second visit
was a long one, and when he returned the kid was roasted and the repast
ready. Franz was sitting on the spot where he was on the previous
evening when his mysterious host had invited him to supper; and he saw
the little yacht, now like a sea-gull on the wave, continuing her flight
towards Corsica.

"Why," he remarked to Gaetano, "you told me that Signor Sinbad was going
to Malaga, while it seems he is in the direction of Porto-Vecchio."

"Don't you remember," said the patron, "I told you that among the crew
there were two Corsican brigands?"

"True; and he is going to land them," added Franz.

"Precisely so," replied Gaetano. "Ah, he is one who fears neither God
nor Satan, they say, and would at any time run fifty leagues out of his
