noise?"

"Oh, oh!" cried Morrel, turning pale, "what is it?" A loud noise was
heard on the stairs of people moving hastily, and half-stifled sobs.
Morrel rose and advanced to the door; but his strength failed him and he
sank into a chair. The two men remained opposite one another, Morrel
trembling in every limb, the stranger gazing at him with an air of
profound pity. The noise had ceased; but it seemed that Morrel expected
something--something had occasioned the noise, and something must
follow. The stranger fancied he heard footsteps on the stairs; and that
the footsteps, which were those of several persons, stopped at the door.
A key was inserted in the lock of the first door, and the creaking of
hinges was audible.

"There are only two persons who have the key to that door," murmured
Morrel, "Cocles and Julie." At this instant the second door opened, and
the young girl, her eyes bathed with tears, appeared. Morrel rose
tremblingly, supporting himself by the arm of the chair. He would have
spoken, but his voice failed him. "Oh, father!" said she, clasping her
hands, "forgive your child for being the bearer of evil tidings."

Morrel again changed color. Julie threw herself into his arms.

"Oh, father, father!" murmured she, "courage!"

"The _Pharaon_ has gone down, then?" said Morrel in a hoarse voice. The
young girl did not speak; but she made an affirmative sign with her head
as she lay on her father's breast.

"And the crew?" asked Morrel.

"Saved," said the girl; "saved by the crew of the vessel that has just
entered the harbor." Morrel raised his two hands to heaven with an
expression of resignation and sublime gratitude. "Thanks, my God," said
he, "at least thou strikest but me alone." A tear moistened the eye of
the phlegmatic Englishman.

"Come in, come in," said Morrel, "for I presume you are all at the
door."

Scarcely had he uttered those words than Madame Morrel entered weeping
bitterly. Emmanuel followed her, and in the antechamber were visible the
rough faces of seven or eight half-naked sailors. At the sight of these
men the Englishman started and advanced a step; then restrained himself,
and retired into the farthest and most obscure corner of the apartment.
Madame Morrel sat down by her husband and took one of his hands in hers,
Julie still lay with her head on his shoulder, Emmanuel stood in the
centre of the chamber and seemed to form the link between Morrel's
family and the sailors at the door.

"How did this happen?" said Morrel.

"Draw nearer, Penelon," said the young man, "and tell us all about it."

An old seaman, bronzed by the tropical sun, advanced, twirling the
remains of a hat between his hands. "Good-day, M. Morrel," said he, as
if he had just quitted Marseilles the previous evening, and had just
returned from Aix or Toulon.

"Good-day, Penelon," returned Morrel, who could not refrain from smiling
through his tears, "where is the captain?"

"The captain, M. Morrel,--he has stayed behind sick at Palma; but please
God, it won't be much, and you will see him in a few days all alive and
hearty."

"Well, now tell your story, Penelon."


Penelon rolled his quid in his cheek, placed his hand before his mouth,
turned his head, and sent a long jet of tobacco-juice into the
antechamber, advanced his foot, balanced himself, and began,--"You see,
M. Morrel," said he, "we were somewhere between Cape Blanc and Cape
Boyador, sailing with a fair breeze, south-south-west after a week's
calm, when Captain Gaumard comes up to me--I was at the helm I should
tell you--and says, 'Penelon, what do you think of those clouds coming
up over there?' I was just then looking at them myself. 'What do I
think, captain? Why I think that they are rising faster than they have
any business to do, and that they would not be so black if they didn't
mean mischief.'--'That's my opinion too,' said the captain, 'and I'll
take precautions accordingly. We are carrying too much canvas. Avast,
there, all hands! Take in the studding-sails and stow the flying jib.'
It was time; the squall was on us, and the vessel began to heel. 'Ah,'
said the captain, 'we have still too much canvas set; all hands lower
the mainsail!' Five minutes after, it was down; and we sailed under
mizzen-topsails and top-gallant sails. 'Well, Penelon,' said the
captain, 'what makes you shake your head?' 'Why,' I says, 'I still think
you've got too much on.' 'I think you're right,' answered he, 'we shall
have a gale.' 'A gale? More than that, we shall have a tempest, or I
don't know what's what.' You could see the wind coming like the dust at
Montredon; luckily the captain understood his business. 'Take in two
reefs in the top-sails,' cried the captain; 'let go the bowlin's, haul
the brace, lower the top-gallant sails, haul out the reef-tackles on the
yards.'"


"That was not enough for those latitudes," said the Englishman; "I
should have taken four reefs in the topsails and furled the spanker."

His firm, sonorous, and unexpected voice made everyone start. Penelon
put his hand over his eyes, and then stared at the man who thus
criticized the manœuvres of his captain. "We did better than that, sir,"
said the old sailor respectfully; "we put the helm up to run before the
tempest; ten minutes after we struck our top-sails and scudded under
bare poles."

"The vessel was very old to risk that," said the Englishman.

"Eh, it was that that did the business; after pitching heavily for
twelve hours we sprung a leak. 'Penelon,' said the captain, 'I think we
are sinking, give me the helm, and go down into the hold.' I gave him
the helm, and descended; there was already three feet of water. 'All
hands to the pumps!' I shouted; but it was too late, and it seemed the
more we pumped the more came in. 'Ah,' said I, after four hours' work,
'since we are sinking, let us sink; we can die but once.' 'Is that the
example you set, Penelon?' cries the captain; 'very well, wait a
minute.' He went into his cabin and came back with a brace of pistols.
'I will blow the brains out of the first man who leaves the pump,' said
he."

"Well done!" said the Englishman.


"There's nothing gives you so much courage as good reasons," continued
the sailor; "and during that time the wind had abated, and the sea gone
down, but the water kept rising; not much, only two inches an hour, but
still it rose. Two inches an hour does not seem much, but in twelve
hours that makes two feet, and three we had before, that makes five.
'Come,' said the captain, 'we have done all in our power, and M. Morrel
will have nothing to reproach us with, we have tried to save the ship,
let us now save ourselves. To the boats, my lads, as quick as you can.'
Now," continued Penelon, "you see, M. Morrel, a sailor is attached to
his ship, but still more to his life, so we did not wait to be told
twice; the more so, that the ship was sinking under us, and seemed to
say, 'Get along--save yourselves.' We soon launched the boat, and all
eight of us got into it. The captain descended last, or rather, he did
not descend, he would not quit the vessel; so I took him round the
waist, and threw him into the boat, and then I jumped after him. It was
time, for just as I jumped the deck burst with a noise like the
broadside of a man-of-war. Ten minutes after she pitched forward, then
the other way, spun round and round, and then good-bye to the _Pharaon_.
As for us, we were three days without anything to eat or drink, so that
we began to think of drawing lots who should feed the rest, when we saw
_La Gironde_; we made signals of distress, she perceived us, made for
us, and took us all on board. There now, M. Morrel, that's the whole
truth, on the honor of a sailor; is not it true, you fellows there?" A
general murmur of approbation showed that the narrator had faithfully
detailed their misfortunes and sufferings.

"Well, well," said M. Morrel, "I know there was no one in fault but
destiny. It was the will of God that this should happen, blessed be his
name. What wages are due to you?"

"Oh, don't let us talk of that, M. Morrel."

"Yes, but we will talk of it."

"Well, then, three months," said Penelon.

"Cocles, pay two hundred francs to each of these good fellows," said
Morrel. "At another time," added he, "I should have said, Give them,
besides, two hundred francs over as a present; but times are changed,
and the little money that remains to me is not my own."

Penelon turned to his companions, and exchanged a few words with them.

"As for that, M. Morrel," said he, again turning his quid, "as for that-
---"

"As for what?"

"The money."

"Well----"

"Well, we all say that fifty francs will be enough for us at present,
and that we will wait for the rest."

"Thanks, my friends, thanks!" cried Morrel gratefully; "take it--take
it; and if you can find another employer, enter his service; you are
free to do so." These last words produced a prodigious effect on the
seaman. Penelon nearly swallowed his quid; fortunately he recovered.
"What, M. Morrel!" said he in a low voice, "you send us away; you are
then angry with us!"

"No, no," said M. Morrel, "I am not angry, quite the contrary, and I do
not send you away; but I have no more ships, and therefore I do not want
any sailors."

"No more ships!" returned Penelon; "well, then, you'll build some; we'll
wait for you."

"I have no money to build ships with, Penelon," said the poor owner
mournfully, "so I cannot accept your kind offer."

"No more money? Then you must not pay us; we can scud, like the
_Pharaon_, under bare poles."

"Enough, enough!" cried Morrel, almost overpowered; "leave me, I pray
you; we shall meet again in a happier time. Emmanuel, go with them, and
