
"On what shall I reflect?"

"On the importance of the step you are taking."

"Is it more serious than going to M. Danglars?"

"Yes; M. Danglars is a money-lover, and those who love money, you know,
think too much of what they risk to be easily induced to fight a duel.
The other is, on the contrary, to all appearance a true nobleman; but do
you not fear to find him a bully?"

"I only fear one thing; namely, to find a man who will not fight."

"Do not be alarmed," said Beauchamp; "he will meet you. My only fear is
that he will be too strong for you."

"My friend," said Morcerf, with a sweet smile, "that is what I wish. The
happiest thing that could occur to me, would be to die in my father's
stead; that would save us all."

"Your mother would die of grief."

"My poor mother!" said Albert, passing his hand across his eyes, "I know
she would; but better so than die of shame."

"Are you quite decided, Albert?"

"Yes; let us go."

"But do you think we shall find the count at home?"

"He intended returning some hours after me, and doubtless he is now at
home." They ordered the driver to take them to No. 30 Champs-Élysées.
Beauchamp wished to go in alone, but Albert observed that as this was an
unusual circumstance he might be allowed to deviate from the usual
etiquette of duels. The cause which the young man espoused was one so
sacred that Beauchamp had only to comply with all his wishes; he yielded
and contented himself with following Morcerf. Albert sprang from the
porter's lodge to the steps. He was received by Baptistin. The count
had, indeed, just arrived, but he was in his bath, and had forbidden
that anyone should be admitted. "But after his bath?" asked Morcerf.

"My master will go to dinner."

"And after dinner?"

"He will sleep an hour."

"Then?"

"He is going to the Opera."

"Are you sure of it?" asked Albert.

"Quite, sir; my master has ordered his horses at eight o'clock
precisely."

"Very good," replied Albert; "that is all I wished to know." Then,
turning towards Beauchamp, "If you have anything to attend to,
Beauchamp, do it directly; if you have any appointment for this evening,
defer it till tomorrow. I depend on you to accompany me to the Opera;
and if you can, bring Château-Renaud with you."

Beauchamp availed himself of Albert's permission, and left him,
promising to call for him at a quarter before eight. On his return home,
Albert expressed his wish to Franz Debray, and Morrel, to see them at
the Opera that evening. Then he went to see his mother, who since the
events of the day before had refused to see anyone, and had kept her
room. He found her in bed, overwhelmed with grief at this public
humiliation. The sight of Albert produced the effect which might
naturally be expected on Mercédès; she pressed her son's hand and sobbed
aloud, but her tears relieved her. Albert stood one moment speechless by
the side of his mother's bed. It was evident from his pale face and knit
brows that his resolution to revenge himself was growing weaker. "My
dear mother," said he, "do you know if M. de Morcerf has any enemy?"
Mercédès started; she noticed that the young man did not say "my
father." "My son," she said, "persons in the count's situation have many
secret enemies. Those who are known are not the most dangerous."

"I know it, and appeal to your penetration. You are of so superior a
mind, nothing escapes you."

"Why do you say so?"

"Because, for instance, you noticed on the evening of the ball we gave,
that M. de Monte Cristo would eat nothing in our house." Mercédès raised
herself on her feverish arm. "M. de Monte Cristo!" she exclaimed; "and
how is he connected with the question you asked me?"


"You know, mother, M. de Monte Cristo is almost an Oriental, and it is
customary with the Orientals to secure full liberty for revenge by not
eating or drinking in the houses of their enemies."

"Do you say M. de Monte Cristo is our enemy?" replied Mercédès, becoming
paler than the sheet which covered her. "Who told you so? Why, you are
mad, Albert! M. de Monte Cristo has only shown us kindness. M. de Monte
Cristo saved your life; you yourself presented him to us. Oh, I entreat
you, my son, if you had entertained such an idea, dispel it; and my
counsel to you--nay, my prayer--is to retain his friendship."

"Mother," replied the young man, "you have special reasons for telling
me to conciliate that man."

"I?" said Mercédès, blushing as rapidly as she had turned pale, and
again becoming paler than ever.

"Yes, doubtless; and is it not that he may never do us any harm?"
Mercédès shuddered, and, fixing on her son a scrutinizing gaze, "You
speak strangely," said she to Albert, "and you appear to have some
singular prejudices. What has the count done? Three days since you were
with him in Normandy; only three days since we looked on him as our best
friend."

An ironical smile passed over Albert's lips. Mercédès saw it and with
the double instinct of woman and mother guessed all; but as she was
prudent and strong-minded she concealed both her sorrows and her fears.
Albert was silent; an instant after, the countess resumed: "You came to
inquire after my health; I will candidly acknowledge that I am not well.
You should install yourself here, and cheer my solitude. I do not wish
to be left alone."

"Mother," said the young man, "you know how gladly I would obey your
wish, but an urgent and important affair obliges me to leave you for the
whole evening."

"Well," replied Mercédès, sighing, "go, Albert; I will not make you a
slave to your filial piety." Albert pretended he did not hear, bowed to
his mother, and quitted her. Scarcely had he shut her door, when
Mercédès called a confidential servant, and ordered him to follow Albert
wherever he should go that evening, and to come and tell her immediately
what he observed. Then she rang for her lady's maid, and, weak as she
was, she dressed, in order to be ready for whatever might happen. The
footman's mission was an easy one. Albert went to his room, and dressed
with unusual care. At ten minutes to eight Beauchamp arrived; he had
seen Château-Renaud, who had promised to be in the orchestra before the
curtain was raised. Both got into Albert's _coupé_; and, as the young
man had no reason to conceal where he was going, he called aloud, "To
the Opera." In his impatience he arrived before the beginning of the
performance.


Château-Renaud was at his post; apprised by Beauchamp of the
circumstances, he required no explanation from Albert. The conduct of
the son in seeking to avenge his father was so natural that Château-
Renaud did not seek to dissuade him, and was content with renewing his
assurances of devotion. Debray was not yet come, but Albert knew that he
seldom lost a scene at the Opera. Albert wandered about the theatre
until the curtain was drawn up. He hoped to meet with M. de Monte Cristo
either in the lobby or on the stairs. The bell summoned him to his seat,
and he entered the orchestra with Château-Renaud and Beauchamp. But his
eyes scarcely quitted the box between the columns, which remained
obstinately closed during the whole of the first act. At last, as Albert
was looking at his watch for about the hundredth time, at the beginning
of the second act the door opened, and Monte Cristo entered, dressed in
black, and, leaning over the front of the box, looked around the pit.
Morrel followed him, and looked also for his sister and brother in-law;
he soon discovered them in another box, and kissed his hand to them.

The count, in his survey of the pit, encountered a pale face and
threatening eyes, which evidently sought to gain his attention. He
recognized Albert, but thought it better not to notice him, as he looked
so angry and discomposed. Without communicating his thoughts to his
companion, he sat down, drew out his opera-glass, and looked another
way. Although apparently not noticing Albert, he did not, however, lose
sight of him, and when the curtain fell at the end of the second act, he
saw him leave the orchestra with his two friends. Then his head was seen
passing at the back of the boxes, and the count knew that the
approaching storm was intended to fall on him. He was at the moment
conversing cheerfully with Morrel, but he was well prepared for what
might happen. The door opened, and Monte Cristo, turning round, saw
Albert, pale and trembling, followed by Beauchamp and Château-Renaud.

"Well," cried he, with that benevolent politeness which distinguished
his salutation from the common civilities of the world, "my cavalier has
attained his object. Good-evening, M. de Morcerf." The countenance of
this man, who possessed such extraordinary control over his feelings,
expressed the most perfect cordiality. Morrel only then recollected the
letter he had received from the viscount, in which, without assigning
any reason, he begged him to go to the Opera, but he understood that
something terrible was brooding.

"We are not come here, sir, to exchange hypocritical expressions of
politeness, or false professions of friendship," said Albert, "but to
demand an explanation." The young man's trembling voice was scarcely
audible. "An explanation at the Opera?" said the count, with that calm
tone and penetrating eye which characterize the man who knows his cause
is good. "Little acquainted as I am with the habits of Parisians, I
should not have thought this the place for such a demand."

"Still, if people will shut themselves up," said Albert, "and cannot be
seen because they are bathing, dining, or asleep, we must avail
ourselves of the opportunity whenever they are to be seen."

"I am not difficult of access, sir; for yesterday, if my memory does not
deceive me, you were at my house."

"Yesterday I was at your house, sir," said the young man; "because then
I knew not who you were." In pronouncing these words Albert had raised
