here; the men run no other danger than that of falling in love with you,
and the women of falling ill of jealousy at seeing you so lovely; I
meant persons who were out in the streets of Rome."

"Ah," asked the countess, "who is out in the streets of Rome at this
hour, unless it be to go to a ball?"

"Our friend, Albert de Morcerf, countess, whom I left in pursuit of his
unknown about seven o'clock this evening," said Franz, "and whom I have
not seen since."

"And don't you know where he is?"

"Not at all."

"Is he armed?"

"He is in masquerade."

"You should not have allowed him to go," said the duke to Franz; "you,
who know Rome better than he does."

"You might as well have tried to stop number three of the _barberi_, who
gained the prize in the race today," replied Franz; "and then moreover,
what could happen to him?"

"Who can tell? The night is gloomy, and the Tiber is very near the Via
Macello." Franz felt a shudder run through his veins at observing that
the feeling of the duke and the countess was so much in unison with his
own personal disquietude.

"I informed them at the hotel that I had the honor of passing the night
here, duke," said Franz, "and desired them to come and inform me of his
return."

"Ah," replied the duke, "here I think, is one of my servants who is
seeking you."

The duke was not mistaken; when he saw Franz, the servant came up to
him.

"Your excellency," he said, "the master of the Hôtel de Londres has sent
to let you know that a man is waiting for you with a letter from the
Viscount of Morcerf."

"A letter from the viscount!" exclaimed Franz.

"Yes."

"And who is the man?"

"I do not know."

"Why did he not bring it to me here?"

"The messenger did not say."

"And where is the messenger?"

"He went away directly he saw me enter the ball-room to find you."

"Oh," said the countess to Franz, "go with all speed--poor young man!
Perhaps some accident has happened to him."

"I will hasten," replied Franz.

"Shall we see you again to give us any information?" inquired the
countess.

"Yes, if it is not any serious affair, otherwise I cannot answer as to
what I may do myself."

"Be prudent, in any event," said the countess.

"Oh, pray be assured of that." Franz took his hat and went away in
haste. He had sent away his carriage with orders for it to fetch him at
two o'clock; fortunately the Palazzo Bracciano, which is on one side in
the Corso, and on the other in the Square of the Holy Apostles, is
hardly ten minutes' walk from the Hôtel de Londres.

As he came near the hotel, Franz saw a man in the middle of the street.
He had no doubt that it was the messenger from Albert. The man was
wrapped up in a large cloak. He went up to him, but, to his extreme
astonishment, the stranger first addressed him.

"What wants your excellency of me?" inquired the man, retreating a step
or two, as if to keep on his guard.

"Are not you the person who brought me a letter," inquired Franz, "from
the Viscount of Morcerf?"

"Your excellency lodges at Pastrini's hotel?"

"I do."

"Your excellency is the travelling companion of the viscount?"

"I am."

"Your excellency's name----"

"Is the Baron Franz d'Epinay."


"Then it is to your excellency that this letter is addressed."

"Is there any answer?" inquired Franz, taking the letter from him.

"Yes--your friend at least hopes so."

"Come upstairs with me, and I will give it to you."

"I prefer waiting here," said the messenger, with a smile.

"And why?"

"Your excellency will know when you have read the letter."

"Shall I find you here, then?"

"Certainly."

Franz entered the hotel. On the staircase he met Signor Pastrini.
"Well?" said the landlord.

"Well--what?" responded Franz.

"You have seen the man who desired to speak with you from your friend?"
he asked of Franz.

"Yes, I have seen him," he replied, "and he has handed this letter to
me. Light the candles in my apartment, if you please." The innkeeper
gave orders to a servant to go before Franz with a light. The young man
had found Signor Pastrini looking very much alarmed, and this had only
made him the more anxious to read Albert's letter; and so he went
instantly towards the waxlight, and unfolded it. It was written and
signed by Albert. Franz read it twice before he could comprehend what it
contained. It was thus worded:--

My Dear Fellow,--The moment you have received this, have the kindness to
take the letter of credit from my pocket-book, which you will find in
the square drawer of the _secrétaire_; add your own to it, if it be not
sufficient. Run to Torlonia, draw from him instantly four thousand
piastres, and give them to the bearer. It is urgent that I should have
this money without delay. I do not say more, relying on you as you may
rely on me. Your friend,

Albert de Morcerf.

P.S.--I now believe in Italian _banditti_.

Below these lines were written, in a strange hand, the following in
Italian:

_Se alle sei della mattina le quattro mile piastre non sono nelle mie
mani, alla sette il Conte Alberto avrà cessato di vivere_.

Luigi Vampa.

"_If by six in the morning the four thousand piastres are not in my
hands, by seven o'clock the Count Albert will have ceased to live_."

This second signature explained everything to Franz, who now understood
the objection of the messenger to coming up into the apartment; the
street was safer for him. Albert, then, had fallen into the hands of the
famous bandit chief, in whose existence he had for so long a time
refused to believe.

There was no time to lose. He hastened to open the _secrétaire_, and
found the pocket-book in the drawer, and in it the letter of credit.
There were in all six thousand piastres, but of these six thousand
Albert had already expended three thousand. As to Franz, he had no
letter of credit, as he lived at Florence, and had only come to Rome to
pass seven or eight days; he had brought but a hundred louis, and of
these he had not more than fifty left. Thus seven or eight hundred
piastres were wanting to them both to make up the sum that Albert
required. True, he might in such a case rely on the kindness of Signor
Torlonia. He was, therefore, about to return to the Palazzo Bracciano
without loss of time, when suddenly a luminous idea crossed his mind. He
remembered the Count of Monte Cristo. Franz was about to ring for Signor
Pastrini, when that worthy presented himself.

"My dear sir," he said, hastily, "do you know if the count is within?"

"Yes, your excellency; he has this moment returned."

"Is he in bed?"

"I should say no."

"Then ring at his door, if you please, and request him to be so kind as
to give me an audience." Signor Pastrini did as he was desired, and
returning five minutes after, he said,

"The count awaits your excellency."

Franz went along the corridor, and a servant introduced him to the
count. He was in a small room which Franz had not yet seen, and which
was surrounded with divans. The count came towards him.

