honorably acquired; and already you contemplated crime under the excuse
of want, when God worked a miracle in your behalf, sending you, by my
hands, a fortune--brilliant, indeed, for you, who had never possessed
any. But this unexpected, unhoped-for, unheard-of fortune sufficed you
no longer when you once possessed it; you wished to double it, and how?-
-by a murder! You succeeded, and then God snatched it from you, and
brought you to justice."

"It was not I who wished to kill the Jew," said Caderousse; "it was La
Carconte."

"Yes," said Monte Cristo, "and God,--I cannot say in justice, for his
justice would have slain you,--but God, in his mercy, spared your life."

"_Pardieu!_ to transport me for life, how merciful!"

"You thought it a mercy then, miserable wretch! The coward who feared
death rejoiced at perpetual disgrace; for like all galley-slaves, you
said, 'I may escape from prison, I cannot from the grave.' And you said
truly; the way was opened for you unexpectedly. An Englishman visited
Toulon, who had vowed to rescue two men from infamy, and his choice fell
on you and your companion. You received a second fortune, money and
tranquillity were restored to you, and you, who had been condemned to a
felon's life, might live as other men. Then, wretched creature, then you
tempted God a third time. 'I have not enough,' you said, when you had
more than you before possessed, and you committed a third crime, without
reason, without excuse. God is wearied; he has punished you."

Caderousse was fast sinking. "Give me drink," said he: "I thirst--I
burn!" Monte Cristo gave him a glass of water. "And yet that villain,
Benedetto, will escape!"

"No one, I tell you, will escape; Benedetto will be punished."

"Then, you, too, will be punished, for you did not do your duty as a
priest--you should have prevented Benedetto from killing me."

"I?" said the count, with a smile which petrified the dying man, "when
you had just broken your knife against the coat of mail which protected
my breast! Yet perhaps if I had found you humble and penitent, I might
have prevented Benedetto from killing you; but I found you proud and
blood-thirsty, and I left you in the hands of God."

"I do not believe there is a God," howled Caderousse; "you do not
believe it; you lie--you lie!"

"Silence," said the abbé; "you will force the last drop of blood from
your veins. What! you do not believe in God when he is striking you
dead? you will not believe in him, who requires but a prayer, a word, a
tear, and he will forgive? God, who might have directed the assassin's
dagger so as to end your career in a moment, has given you this quarter
of an hour for repentance. Reflect, then, wretched man, and repent."

"No," said Caderousse, "no; I will not repent. There is no God; there is
no Providence--all comes by chance."

"There is a Providence; there is a God," said Monte Cristo, "of whom you
are a striking proof, as you lie in utter despair, denying him, while I
stand before you, rich, happy, safe and entreating that God in whom you
endeavor not to believe, while in your heart you still believe in him."

"But who are you, then?" asked Caderousse, fixing his dying eyes on the
count. "Look well at me!" said Monte Cristo, putting the light near his
face. "Well, the abbé--the Abbé Busoni." Monte Cristo took off the wig
which disfigured him, and let fall his black hair, which added so much
to the beauty of his pallid features. "Oh?" said Caderousse,
thunderstruck, "but for that black hair, I should say you were the
Englishman, Lord Wilmore."

"I am neither the Abbé Busoni nor Lord Wilmore," said Monte Cristo;
"think again,--do you not recollect me?" There was a magic effect in the
count's words, which once more revived the exhausted powers of the
miserable man. "Yes, indeed," said he; "I think I have seen you and
known you formerly."

"Yes, Caderousse, you have seen me; you knew me once."

"Who, then, are you? and why, if you knew me, do you let me die?"

"Because nothing can save you; your wounds are mortal. Had it been
possible to save you, I should have considered it another proof of God's
mercy, and I would again have endeavored to restore you, I swear by my
father's tomb."

"By your father's tomb!" said Caderousse, supported by a supernatural
power, and half-raising himself to see more distinctly the man who had
just taken the oath which all men hold sacred; "who, then, are you?" The
count had watched the approach of death. He knew this was the last
struggle. He approached the dying man, and, leaning over him with a calm
and melancholy look, he whispered, "I am--I am----"

And his almost closed lips uttered a name so low that the count himself
appeared afraid to hear it. Caderousse, who had raised himself on his
knees, and stretched out his arm, tried to draw back, then clasping his
hands, and raising them with a desperate effort, "O my God, my God!"
said he, "pardon me for having denied thee; thou dost exist, thou art
indeed man's father in heaven, and his judge on earth. My God, my Lord,
I have long despised thee! Pardon me, my God; receive me, O my Lord!"
Caderousse sighed deeply, and fell back with a groan. The blood no
longer flowed from his wounds. He was dead.

"_One!_" said the count mysteriously, his eyes fixed on the corpse,
disfigured by so awful a death. Ten minutes afterwards the surgeon and
the procureur arrived, the one accompanied by the porter, the other by
Ali, and were received by the Abbé Busoni, who was praying by the side
of the corpse.



Chapter 84. Beauchamp

The daring attempt to rob the count was the topic of conversation
throughout Paris for the next fortnight. The dying man had signed a
deposition declaring Benedetto to be the assassin. The police had orders
to make the strictest search for the murderer. Caderousse's knife, dark
lantern, bunch of keys, and clothing, excepting the waistcoat, which
could not be found, were deposited at the registry; the corpse was
conveyed to the morgue. The count told everyone that this adventure had
happened during his absence at Auteuil, and that he only knew what was
related by the Abbé Busoni, who that evening, by mere chance, had
requested to pass the night in his house, to examine some valuable books
in his library. Bertuccio alone turned pale whenever Benedetto's name
was mentioned in his presence, but there was no reason why anyone should
notice his doing so. Villefort, being called on to prove the crime, was
preparing his brief with the same ardor that he was accustomed to
exercise when required to speak in criminal cases.

But three weeks had already passed, and the most diligent search had
been unsuccessful; the attempted robbery and the murder of the robber by
his comrade were almost forgotten in anticipation of the approaching
marriage of Mademoiselle Danglars to the Count Andrea Cavalcanti. It was
expected that this wedding would shortly take place, as the young man
was received at the banker's as the betrothed. Letters had been
despatched to M. Cavalcanti, as the count's father, who highly approved
of the union, regretted his inability to leave Parma at that time, and
promised a wedding gift of a hundred and fifty thousand livres. It was
agreed that the three millions should be intrusted to Danglars to
invest; some persons had warned the young man of the circumstances of
his future father-in-law, who had of late sustained repeated losses; but
with sublime disinterestedness and confidence the young man refused to
listen, or to express a single doubt to the baron. The baron adored
Count Andrea Cavalcanti: not so Mademoiselle Eugénie Danglars. With an
instinctive hatred of matrimony, she suffered Andrea's attentions in
order to get rid of Morcerf; but when Andrea urged his suit, she
betrayed an entire dislike to him. The baron might possibly have
perceived it, but, attributing it to a caprice, feigned ignorance.

The delay demanded by Beauchamp had nearly expired. Morcerf appreciated
the advice of Monte Cristo to let things die away of their own accord.
No one had taken up the remark about the general, and no one had
recognized in the officer who betrayed the castle of Yanina the noble
count in the House of Peers. Albert, however felt no less insulted; the
few lines which had irritated him were certainly intended as an insult.
Besides, the manner in which Beauchamp had closed the conference left a
bitter recollection in his heart. He cherished the thought of the duel,
hoping to conceal its true cause even from his seconds. Beauchamp had
not been seen since the day he visited Albert, and those of whom the
latter inquired always told him he was out on a journey which would
detain him some days. Where he was no one knew.

One morning Albert was awakened by his valet de chambre, who announced
Beauchamp. Albert rubbed his eyes, ordered his servant to introduce him
into the small smoking-room on the ground floor, dressed himself
quickly, and went down. He found Beauchamp pacing the room; on
perceiving him Beauchamp stopped. "Your arrival here, without waiting my
visit at your house today, looks well, sir," said Albert. "Tell me, may
I shake hands with you, saying, 'Beauchamp, acknowledge you have injured
me, and retain my friendship,' or must I simply propose to you a choice
of arms?"

"Albert," said Beauchamp, with a look of sorrow which stupefied the
young man, "let us first sit down and talk."

"Rather, sir, before we sit down, I must demand your answer."

"Albert," said the journalist, "these are questions which it is
difficult to answer."

"I will facilitate it by repeating the question, 'Will you, or will you
not, retract?'"

"Morcerf, it is not enough to answer 'yes' or 'no' to questions which
concern the honor, the social interest, and the life of such a man as
Lieutenant-général the Count of Morcerf, peer of France."


"What must then be done?"

"What I have done, Albert. I reasoned thus--money, time, and fatigue are
nothing compared with the reputation and interests of a whole family;
probabilities will not suffice, only facts will justify a deadly combat
with a friend. If I strike with the sword, or discharge the contents of
a pistol at man with whom, for three years, I have been on terms of
intimacy, I must, at least, know why I do so; I must meet him with a
heart at ease, and that quiet conscience which a man needs when his own
arm must save his life."

"Well," said Morcerf, impatiently, "what does all this mean?"

"It means that I have just returned from Yanina."
