francs.

"'Given at Constantinople, by authority of his highness, in the year
1247 of the Hegira.

"'Signed El-Kobbir.'

"'That this record should have all due authority, it shall bear the
imperial seal, which the vendor is bound to have affixed to it.'

"Near the merchant's signature there was, indeed, the seal of the
sublime emperor. A dreadful silence followed the reading of this
document; the count could only stare, and his gaze, fixed as if
unconsciously on Haydée, seemed one of fire and blood. 'Madame,' said
the president, 'may reference be made to the Count of Monte Cristo, who
is now, I believe, in Paris?'--'Sir,' replied Haydée, 'the Count of
Monte Cristo, my foster-father, has been in Normandy the last three
days.'

"'Who, then, has counselled you to take this step, one for which the
court is deeply indebted to you, and which is perfectly natural,
considering your birth and your misfortunes?'--'Sir,' replied Haydée, 'I
have been led to take this step from a feeling of respect and grief.
Although a Christian, may God forgive me, I have always sought to
revenge my illustrious father. Since I set my foot in France, and knew
the traitor lived in Paris, I have watched carefully. I live retired in
the house of my noble protector, but I do it from choice. I love
retirement and silence, because I can live with my thoughts and
recollections of past days. But the Count of Monte Cristo surrounds me
with every paternal care, and I am ignorant of nothing which passes in
the world. I learn all in the silence of my apartments,--for instance, I
see all the newspapers, every periodical, as well as every new piece of
music; and by thus watching the course of the life of others, I learned
what had transpired this morning in the House of Peers, and what was to
take place this evening; then I wrote.'


"'Then,' remarked the president, 'the Count of Monte Cristo knows
nothing of your present proceedings?'--'He is quite unaware of them, and
I have but one fear, which is that he should disapprove of what I have
done. But it is a glorious day for me,' continued the young girl,
raising her ardent gaze to heaven, 'that on which I find at last an
opportunity of avenging my father!'

"The count had not uttered one word the whole of this time. His
colleagues looked at him, and doubtless pitied his prospects, blighted
under the perfumed breath of a woman. His misery was depicted in
sinister lines on his countenance. 'M. de Morcerf,' said the president,
'do you recognize this lady as the daughter of Ali Tepelini, pasha of
Yanina?'--'No,' said Morcerf, attempting to rise, 'it is a base plot,
contrived by my enemies.' Haydée, whose eyes had been fixed on the door,
as if expecting someone, turned hastily, and, seeing the count standing,
shrieked, 'You do not know me?' said she. 'Well, I fortunately recognize
you! You are Fernand Mondego, the French officer who led the troops of
my noble father! It is you who surrendered the castle of Yanina! It is
you who, sent by him to Constantinople, to treat with the emperor for
the life or death of your benefactor, brought back a false mandate
granting full pardon! It is you who, with that mandate, obtained the
pasha's ring, which gave you authority over Selim, the fire-keeper! It
is you who stabbéd Selim. It is you who sold us, my mother and me, to
the merchant, El-Kobbir! Assassin, assassin, assassin, you have still on
your brow your master's blood! Look, gentlemen, all!'

"These words had been pronounced with such enthusiasm and evident truth,
that every eye was fixed on the count's forehead, and he himself passed
his hand across it, as if he felt Ali's blood still lingering there.
'You positively recognize M. de Morcerf as the officer, Fernand
Mondego?'--'Indeed I do!' cried Haydée. 'Oh, my mother, it was you who
said, "You were free, you had a beloved father, you were destined to be
almost a queen. Look well at that man; it is he who raised your father's
head on the point of a spear; it is he who sold us; it is he who forsook
us! Look well at his right hand, on which he has a large wound; if you
forgot his features, you would know him by that hand, into which fell,
one by one, the gold pieces of the merchant El-Kobbir!" I know him! Ah,
let him say now if he does not recognize me!' Each word fell like a
dagger on Morcerf, and deprived him of a portion of his energy; as she
uttered the last, he hid his mutilated hand hastily in his bosom, and
fell back on his seat, overwhelmed by wretchedness and despair. This
scene completely changed the opinion of the assembly respecting the
accused count.

"'Count of Morcerf,' said the president, 'do not allow yourself to be
cast down; answer. The justice of the court is supreme and impartial as
that of God; it will not suffer you to be trampled on by your enemies
without giving you an opportunity of defending yourself. Shall further
inquiries be made? Shall two members of the House be sent to Yanina?
Speak!' Morcerf did not reply. Then all the members looked at each other
with terror. They knew the count's energetic and violent temper; it must
be, indeed, a dreadful blow which would deprive him of courage to defend
himself. They expected that his stupefied silence would be followed by a
fiery outburst. 'Well,' asked the president, 'what is your decision?'


"'I have no reply to make,' said the count in a low tone.

"'Has the daughter of Ali Tepelini spoken the truth?' said the
president. 'Is she, then, the terrible witness to whose charge you dare
not plead "Not guilty"? Have you really committed the crimes of which
you are accused?' The count looked around him with an expression which
might have softened tigers, but which could not disarm his judges. Then
he raised his eyes towards the ceiling, but withdrew then, immediately,
as if he feared the roof would open and reveal to his distressed view
that second tribunal called heaven, and that other judge named God.
Then, with a hasty movement, he tore open his coat, which seemed to
stifle him, and flew from the room like a madman; his footstep was heard
one moment in the corridor, then the rattling of his carriage-wheels as
he was driven rapidly away. 'Gentlemen,' said the president, when
silence was restored, 'is the Count of Morcerf convicted of felony,
treason, and conduct unbecoming a member of this House?'--'Yes,' replied
all the members of the committee of inquiry with a unanimous voice.

"Haydée had remained until the close of the meeting. She heard the
count's sentence pronounced without betraying an expression of joy or
pity; then drawing her veil over her face she bowed majestically to the
councillors, and left with that dignified step which Virgil attributes
to his goddesses."



Chapter 87. The Challenge

Then," continued Beauchamp, "I took advantage of the silence and the
darkness to leave the house without being seen. The usher who had
introduced me was waiting for me at the door, and he conducted me
through the corridors to a private entrance opening into the Rue de
Vaugirard. I left with mingled feelings of sorrow and delight. Excuse
me, Albert,--sorrow on your account, and delight with that noble girl,
thus pursuing paternal vengeance. Yes, Albert, from whatever source the
blow may have proceeded--it may be from an enemy, but that enemy is only
the agent of Providence." Albert held his head between his hands; he
raised his face, red with shame and bathed in tears, and seizing
Beauchamp's arm, "My friend," said he, "my life is ended. I cannot
calmly say with you, 'Providence has struck the blow;' but I must
discover who pursues me with this hatred, and when I have found him I
shall kill him, or he will kill me. I rely on your friendship to assist
me, Beauchamp, if contempt has not banished it from your heart."

"Contempt, my friend? How does this misfortune affect you? No, happily
that unjust prejudice is forgotten which made the son responsible for
the father's actions. Review your life, Albert; although it is only just
beginning, did a lovely summer's day ever dawn with greater purity than
has marked the commencement of your career? No, Albert, take my advice.
You are young and rich--leave Paris--all is soon forgotten in this great
Babylon of excitement and changing tastes. You will return after three
or four years with a Russian princess for a bride, and no one will think
more of what occurred yesterday than if it had happened sixteen years
ago."

"Thank you, my dear Beauchamp, thank you for the excellent feeling which
prompts your advice; but it cannot be. I have told you my wish, or
rather my determination. You understand that, interested as I am in this
affair, I cannot see it in the same light as you do. What appears to you
to emanate from a celestial source, seems to me to proceed from one far
less pure. Providence appears to me to have no share in this affair; and
happily so, for instead of the invisible, impalpable agent of celestial
rewards and punishments, I shall find one both palpable and visible, on
whom I shall revenge myself, I assure you, for all I have suffered
during the last month. Now, I repeat, Beauchamp, I wish to return to
human and material existence, and if you are still the friend you
profess to be, help me to discover the hand that struck the blow."

"Be it so," said Beauchamp; "if you must have me descend to earth, I
submit; and if you will seek your enemy, I will assist you, and I will
engage to find him, my honor being almost as deeply interested as
yours."

"Well, then, you understand, Beauchamp, that we begin our search
immediately. Each moment's delay is an eternity for me. The calumniator
is not yet punished, and he may hope that he will not be; but, on my
honor, if he thinks so, he deceives himself."

"Well, listen, Morcerf."

"Ah, Beauchamp, I see you know something already; you will restore me to
life."

"I do not say there is any truth in what I am going to tell you, but it
is, at least, a ray of light in a dark night; by following it we may,
perhaps, discover something more certain."

"Tell me; satisfy my impatience."

"Well, I will tell you what I did not like to mention on my return from
Yanina."

"Say on."

"I went, of course, to the chief banker of the town to make inquiries.
At the first word, before I had even mentioned your father's name"--

"'Ah,' said he. 'I guess what brings you here.'

"'How, and why?'

"'Because a fortnight since I was questioned on the same subject.'

"'By whom?'--'By a Paris banker, my correspondent.'

"'Whose name is----'

