
"On the contrary, it is a matter of the utmost importance, Edmond!"
replied the old man. "Who knows if tomorrow, or the next day after, the
third attack may not come on? and then must not all be over? Yes,
indeed, I have often thought with a bitter joy that these riches, which
would make the wealth of a dozen families, will be forever lost to those
men who persecute me. This idea was one of vengeance to me, and I tasted
it slowly in the night of my dungeon and the despair of my captivity.
But now I have forgiven the world for the love of you; now that I see
you, young and with a promising future,--now that I think of all that
may result to you in the good fortune of such a disclosure, I shudder at
any delay, and tremble lest I should not assure to one as worthy as
yourself the possession of so vast an amount of hidden wealth." Edmond
turned away his head with a sigh.

"You persist in your incredulity, Edmond," continued Faria. "My words
have not convinced you. I see you require proofs. Well, then, read this
paper, which I have never shown to anyone."

"Tomorrow, my dear friend," said Edmond, desirous of not yielding to the
old man's madness. "I thought it was understood that we should not talk
of that until tomorrow."

"Then we will not talk of it until tomorrow; but read this paper today."

"I will not irritate him," thought Edmond, and taking the paper, of
which half was wanting,--having been burnt, no doubt, by some accident,-
-he read:


"This treasure, which may amount to two... of Roman crowns in the most
distant a... of the second opening wh... declare to belong to him alo...
heir. "25th April, 149'"

"Well!" said Faria, when the young man had finished reading it.

"Why," replied Dantès, "I see nothing but broken lines and unconnected
words, which are rendered illegible by fire."

"Yes, to you, my friend, who read them for the first time; but not for
me, who have grown pale over them by many nights' study, and have
reconstructed every phrase, completed every thought."

"And do you believe you have discovered the hidden meaning?"

"I am sure I have, and you shall judge for yourself; but first listen to
the history of this paper."

"Silence!" exclaimed Dantès. "Steps approach--I go--adieu!"

And Dantès, happy to escape the history and explanation which would be
sure to confirm his belief in his friend's mental instability, glided
like a snake along the narrow passage; while Faria, restored by his
alarm to a certain amount of activity, pushed the stone into place with
his foot, and covered it with a mat in order the more effectually to
avoid discovery.

It was the governor, who, hearing of Faria's illness from the jailer,
had come in person to see him.

Faria sat up to receive him, avoiding all gestures in order that he
might conceal from the governor the paralysis that had already half
stricken him with death. His fear was lest the governor, touched with
pity, might order him to be removed to better quarters, and thus
separate him from his young companion. But fortunately this was not the
case, and the governor left him, convinced that the poor madman, for
whom in his heart he felt a kind of affection, was only troubled with a
slight indisposition.

During this time, Edmond, seated on his bed with his head in his hands,
tried to collect his scattered thoughts. Faria, since their first
acquaintance, had been on all points so rational and logical, so
wonderfully sagacious, in fact, that he could not understand how so much
wisdom on all points could be allied with madness. Was Faria deceived as
to his treasure, or was all the world deceived as to Faria?

Dantès remained in his cell all day, not daring to return to his friend,
thinking thus to defer the moment when he should be convinced, once for
all, that the abbé was mad--such a conviction would be so terrible!

But, towards the evening after the hour for the customary visit had gone
by, Faria, not seeing the young man appear, tried to move and get over
the distance which separated them. Edmond shuddered when he heard the
painful efforts which the old man made to drag himself along; his leg
was inert, and he could no longer make use of one arm. Edmond was
obliged to assist him, for otherwise he would not have been able to
enter by the small aperture which led to Dantès' chamber.

"Here I am, pursuing you remorselessly," he said with a benignant smile.
"You thought to escape my munificence, but it is in vain. Listen to me."

Edmond saw there was no escape, and placing the old man on his bed, he
seated himself on the stool beside him.

"You know," said the abbé, "that I was the secretary and intimate friend
of Cardinal Spada, the last of the princes of that name. I owe to this
worthy lord all the happiness I ever knew. He was not rich, although the
wealth of his family had passed into a proverb, and I heard the phrase
very often, 'As rich as a Spada.' But he, like public rumor, lived on
this reputation for wealth; his palace was my paradise. I was tutor to
his nephews, who are dead; and when he was alone in the world, I tried
by absolute devotion to his will, to make up to him all he had done for
me during ten years of unremitting kindness. The cardinal's house had no
secrets for me. I had often seen my noble patron annotating ancient
volumes, and eagerly searching amongst dusty family manuscripts. One day
when I was reproaching him for his unavailing searches, and deploring
the prostration of mind that followed them, he looked at me, and,
smiling bitterly, opened a volume relating to the History of the City of
Rome. There, in the twentieth chapter of the Life of Pope Alexander VI.,
were the following lines, which I can never forget:--

"'The great wars of Romagna had ended; Cæsar Borgia, who had completed
his conquest, had need of money to purchase all Italy. The pope had also
need of money to bring matters to an end with Louis XII. King of France,
who was formidable still in spite of his recent reverses; and it was
necessary, therefore, to have recourse to some profitable scheme, which
was a matter of great difficulty in the impoverished condition of
exhausted Italy. His holiness had an idea. He determined to make two
cardinals.'

"By choosing two of the greatest personages of Rome, especially rich
men--_this_ was the return the holy father looked for. In the first
place, he could sell the great appointments and splendid offices which
the cardinals already held; and then he had the two hats to sell
besides. There was a third point in view, which will appear hereafter.

"The pope and Cæsar Borgia first found the two future cardinals; they
were Giovanni Rospigliosi, who held four of the highest dignities of the
Holy See, and Cæsar Spada, one of the noblest and richest of the Roman
nobility; both felt the high honor of such a favor from the pope. They
were ambitious, and Cæsar Borgia soon found purchasers for their
appointments. The result was, that Rospigliosi and Spada paid for being
cardinals, and eight other persons paid for the offices the cardinals
held before their elevation, and thus eight hundred thousand crowns
entered into the coffers of the speculators.


"It is time now to proceed to the last part of the speculation. The pope
heaped attentions upon Rospigliosi and Spada, conferred upon them the
insignia of the cardinalate, and induced them to arrange their affairs
and take up their residence at Rome. Then the pope and Cæsar Borgia
invited the two cardinals to dinner. This was a matter of dispute
between the holy father and his son. Cæsar thought they could make use
of one of the means which he always had ready for his friends, that is
to say, in the first place, the famous key which was given to certain
persons with the request that they go and open a designated cupboard.
This key was furnished with a small iron point,--a negligence on the
part of the locksmith. When this was pressed to effect the opening of
the cupboard, of which the lock was difficult, the person was pricked by
this small point, and died next day. Then there was the ring with the
lion's head, which Cæsar wore when he wanted to greet his friends with a
clasp of the hand. The lion bit the hand thus favored, and at the end of
twenty-four hours, the bite was mortal.

"Cæsar proposed to his father, that they should either ask the cardinals
to open the cupboard, or shake hands with them; but Alexander VI.,
replied: 'Now as to the worthy cardinals, Spada and Rospigliosi, let us
ask both of them to dinner, something tells me that we shall get that
money back. Besides, you forget, Cæsar, an indigestion declares itself
immediately, while a prick or a bite occasions a delay of a day or two.'
Cæsar gave way before such cogent reasoning, and the cardinals were
consequently invited to dinner.

"The table was laid in a vineyard belonging to the pope, near San
Pierdarena, a charming retreat which the cardinals knew very well by
report. Rospigliosi, quite set up with his new dignities, went with a
good appetite and his most ingratiating manner. Spada, a prudent man,
and greatly attached to his only nephew, a young captain of the highest
promise, took paper and pen, and made his will. He then sent word to his
nephew to wait for him near the vineyard; but it appeared the servant
did not find him.

"Spada knew what these invitations meant; since Christianity, so
eminently civilizing, had made progress in Rome, it was no longer a
centurion who came from the tyrant with a message, 'Cæsar wills that you
die.' but it was a legate _à latere_, who came with a smile on his lips
to say from the pope, 'His holiness requests you to dine with him.'

"Spada set out about two o'clock to San Pierdarena. The pope awaited
him. The first sight that attracted the eyes of Spada was that of his
nephew, in full costume, and Cæsar Borgia paying him most marked
attentions. Spada turned pale, as Cæsar looked at him with an ironical
air, which proved that he had anticipated all, and that the snare was
well spread.

"They began dinner and Spada was only able to inquire of his nephew if
he had received his message. The nephew replied no; perfectly
comprehending the meaning of the question. It was too late, for he had
already drunk a glass of excellent wine, placed for him expressly by the
pope's butler. Spada at the same moment saw another bottle approach him,
which he was pressed to taste. An hour afterwards a physician declared
they were both poisoned through eating mushrooms. Spada died on the
threshold of the vineyard; the nephew expired at his own door, making
signs which his wife could not comprehend.

"Then Cæsar and the pope hastened to lay hands on the heritage, under
pretense of seeking for the papers of the dead man. But the inheritance
consisted in this only, a scrap of paper on which Spada had written:--'I
bequeath to my beloved nephew my coffers, my books, and, amongst others,
my breviary with the gold corners, which I beg he will preserve in
