
"And did you go alone?" asked Morrel, after he had read it.

"Emmanuel accompanied me, father. He was to have waited for me at the
corner of the Rue de Musée, but, strange to say, he was not there when I
returned."

"Monsieur Morrel!" exclaimed a voice on the stairs.--"Monsieur Morrel!"

"It is his voice!" said Julie. At this moment Emmanuel entered, his
countenance full of animation and joy. "The _Pharaon_!" he cried; "the
_Pharaon_!"

"What--what--the _Pharaon_! Are you mad, Emmanuel? You know the vessel
is lost."

"The _Pharaon_, sir--they signal the _Pharaon_! The _Pharaon_ is
entering the harbor!" Morrel fell back in his chair, his strength was
failing him; his understanding weakened by such events, refused to
comprehend such incredible, unheard-of, fabulous facts. But his son came
in. "Father," cried Maximilian, "how could you say the _Pharaon_ was
lost? The lookout has signalled her, and they say she is now coming into
port."


"My dear friends," said Morrel, "if this be so, it must be a miracle of
heaven! Impossible, impossible!"

But what was real and not less incredible was the purse he held in his
hand, the acceptance receipted--the splendid diamond.

"Ah, sir," exclaimed Cocles, "what can it mean?--the _Pharaon_?"

"Come, dear ones," said Morrel, rising from his seat, "let us go and
see, and heaven have pity upon us if it be false intelligence!" They all
went out, and on the stairs met Madame Morrel, who had been afraid to go
up into the study. In a moment they were at the Canebière. There was a
crowd on the pier. All the crowd gave way before Morrel. "The _Pharaon_,
the _Pharaon_!" said every voice.

And, wonderful to see, in front of the tower of Saint-Jean, was a ship
bearing on her stern these words, printed in white letters, "The
_Pharaon_, Morrel & Son, of Marseilles." She was the exact duplicate of
the other _Pharaon_, and loaded, as that had been, with cochineal and
indigo. She cast anchor, clued up sails, and on the deck was Captain
Gaumard giving orders, and good old Penelon making signals to M. Morrel.
To doubt any longer was impossible; there was the evidence of the
senses, and ten thousand persons who came to corroborate the testimony.
As Morrel and his son embraced on the pier-head, in the presence and
amid the applause of the whole city witnessing this event, a man, with
his face half-covered by a black beard, and who, concealed behind the
sentry-box, watched the scene with delight, uttered these words in a low
tone: "Be happy, noble heart, be blessed for all the good thou hast done
and wilt do hereafter, and let my gratitude remain in obscurity like
your good deeds."


And with a smile expressive of supreme content, he left his hiding-
place, and without being observed, descended one of the flights of steps
provided for debarkation, and hailing three times, shouted "Jacopo,
Jacopo, Jacopo!" Then a launch came to shore, took him on board, and
conveyed him to a yacht splendidly fitted up, on whose deck he sprung
with the activity of a sailor; thence he once again looked towards
Morrel, who, weeping with joy, was shaking hands most cordially with all
the crowd around him, and thanking with a look the unknown benefactor
whom he seemed to be seeking in the skies. "And now," said the unknown,
"farewell kindness, humanity, and gratitude! Farewell to all the
feelings that expand the heart! I have been heaven's substitute to
recompense the good--now the god of vengeance yields to me his power to
punish the wicked!"

At these words he gave a signal, and, as if only awaiting this signal,
the yacht instantly put out to sea.



Chapter 31. Italy: Sinbad the Sailor

Towards the beginning of the year 1838, two young men belonging to the
first society of Paris, the Vicomte Albert de Morcerf and the Baron
Franz d'Epinay, were at Florence. They had agreed to see the Carnival at
Rome that year, and that Franz, who for the last three or four years had
inhabited Italy, should act as _cicerone_ to Albert. As it is no
inconsiderable affair to spend the Carnival at Rome, especially when you
have no great desire to sleep on the Piazza del Popolo, or the Campo
Vaccino, they wrote to Signor Pastrini, the proprietor of the Hôtel de
Londres, Piazza di Spagna, to reserve comfortable apartments for them.
Signor Pastrini replied that he had only two rooms and a parlor on the
third floor, which he offered at the low charge of a louis per diem.
They accepted his offer; but wishing to make the best use of the time
that was left, Albert started for Naples. As for Franz, he remained at
Florence, and after having passed a few days in exploring the paradise
of the Cascine, and spending two or three evenings at the houses of the
Florentine nobility, he took a fancy into his head (having already
visited Corsica, the cradle of Bonaparte) to visit Elba, the waiting-
place of Napoleon.

One evening he cast off the painter of a sailboat from the iron ring
that secured it to the dock at Leghorn, wrapped himself in his coat and
lay down, and said to the crew,--"To the Island of Elba!" The boat shot
out of the harbor like a bird and the next morning Franz disembarked at
Porto-Ferrajo. He traversed the island, after having followed the traces
which the footsteps of the giant have left, and re-embarked for
Marciana. Two hours after he again landed at Pianosa, where he was
assured that red partridges abounded. The sport was bad; Franz only
succeeded in killing a few partridges, and, like every unsuccessful
sportsman, he returned to the boat very much out of temper. "Ah, if your
excellency chose," said the captain, "you might have capital sport."

"Where?"

"Do you see that island?" continued the captain, pointing to a conical
pile rising from the indigo sea.

"Well, what is this island?"

"The Island of Monte Cristo."

"But I have no permission to shoot over this island."

"Your excellency does not require a permit, for the island is
uninhabited."

"Ah, indeed!" said the young man. "A desert island in the midst of the
Mediterranean must be a curiosity."

"It is very natural; this island is a mass of rocks, and does not
contain an acre of land capable of cultivation."

"To whom does this island belong?"

"To Tuscany."

"What game shall I find there!"

"Thousands of wild goats."

"Who live upon the stones, I suppose," said Franz with an incredulous
smile.

"No, but by browsing the shrubs and trees that grow out of the crevices
of the rocks."

"Where can I sleep?"

"On shore in the grottos, or on board in your cloak; besides, if your
excellency pleases, we can leave as soon as you like--we can sail as
well by night as by day, and if the wind drops we can use our oars."

As Franz had sufficient time, and his apartments at Rome were not yet
available, he accepted the proposition. Upon his answer in the
affirmative, the sailors exchanged a few words together in a low tone.
"Well," asked he, "what now? Is there any difficulty in the way?"

"No." replied the captain, "but we must warn your excellency that the
island is an infected port."

"What do you mean?"

"Monte Cristo although uninhabited, yet serves occasionally as a refuge
for the smugglers and pirates who come from Corsica, Sardinia, and
Africa, and if it becomes known that we have been there, we shall have
to perform quarantine for six days on our return to Leghorn."

"The deuce! That puts a different face on the matter. Six days! Why,
that's as long as the Almighty took to make the world! Too long a wait--
too long."

"But who will say your excellency has been to Monte Cristo?"

"Oh, I shall not," cried Franz.

"Nor I, nor I," chorused the sailors.

"Then steer for Monte Cristo."

The captain gave his orders, the helm was put up, and the boat was soon
sailing in the direction of the island. Franz waited until all was in
order, and when the sail was filled, and the four sailors had taken
their places--three forward, and one at the helm--he resumed the
conversation. "Gaetano," said he to the captain, "you tell me Monte
Cristo serves as a refuge for pirates, who are, it seems to me, a very
different kind of game from the goats."

"Yes, your excellency, and it is true."

"I knew there were smugglers, but I thought that since the capture of
Algiers, and the destruction of the regency, pirates existed only in the
romances of Cooper and Captain Marryat."

"Your excellency is mistaken; there are pirates, like the bandits who
were believed to have been exterminated by Pope Leo XII., and who yet,
every day, rob travellers at the gates of Rome. Has not your excellency
heard that the French _chargé d'affaires_ was robbed six months ago
within five hundred paces of Velletri?"

"Oh, yes, I heard that."

"Well, then, if, like us, your excellency lived at Leghorn, you would
hear, from time to time, that a little merchant vessel, or an English
