"Oh, yes, yes!" exclaimed Dantès; "and I tell you that I will save you
yet."

"Well, then, try. The cold gains upon me. I feel the blood flowing
towards my brain. These horrible chills, which make my teeth chatter and
seem to dislocate my bones, begin to pervade my whole frame; in five
minutes the malady will reach its height, and in a quarter of an hour
there will be nothing left of me but a corpse."

"Oh!" exclaimed Dantès, his heart wrung with anguish.

"Do as you did before, only do not wait so long, all the springs of life
are now exhausted in me, and death," he continued, looking at his
paralyzed arm and leg, "has but half its work to do. If, after having
made me swallow twelve drops instead of ten, you see that I do not
recover, then pour the rest down my throat. Now lift me on my bed, for I
can no longer support myself."

Edmond took the old man in his arms, and laid him on the bed.

"And now, my dear friend," said Faria, "sole consolation of my wretched
existence,--you whom heaven gave me somewhat late, but still gave me, a
priceless gift, and for which I am most grateful,--at the moment of
separating from you forever, I wish you all the happiness and all the
prosperity you so well deserve. My son, I bless thee!" The young man
cast himself on his knees, leaning his head against the old man's bed.

"Listen, now, to what I say in this my dying moment. The treasure of the
Spadas exists. God grants me the boon of vision unrestricted by time or
space. I see it in the depths of the inner cavern. My eyes pierce the
inmost recesses of the earth, and are dazzled at the sight of so much
riches. If you do escape, remember that the poor abbé, whom all the
world called mad, was not so. Hasten to Monte Cristo--avail yourself of
the fortune--for you have indeed suffered long enough." A violent
convulsion attacked the old man. Dantès raised his head and saw Faria's
eyes injected with blood. It seemed as if a flow of blood had ascended
from the chest to the head.

"Adieu, adieu!" murmured the old man, clasping Edmond's hand
convulsively--"adieu!"

"Oh, no,--no, not yet," he cried; "do not forsake me! Oh, succor him!
Help--help--help!"

"Hush--hush!" murmured the dying man, "that they may not separate us if
you save me!"

"You are right. Oh, yes, yes; be assured I shall save you! Besides,
although you suffer much, you do not seem to be in such agony as you
were before."

"Do not mistake. I suffer less because there is in me less strength to
endure. At your age we have faith in life; it is the privilege of youth
to believe and hope, but old men see death more clearly. Oh, 'tis here--
'tis here--'tis over--my sight is gone--my senses fail! Your hand,
Dantès! Adieu--adieu!" And raising himself by a final effort, in which
he summoned all his faculties, he said,--"Monte Cristo, forget not Monte
Cristo!" And he fell back on the bed. The crisis was terrible, and a
rigid form with twisted limbs, swollen eyelids, and lips flecked with
bloody foam, lay on the bed of torture, in place of the intellectual
being who so lately rested there.

Dantès took the lamp, placed it on a projecting stone above the bed,
whence its tremulous light fell with strange and fantastic ray on the
distorted countenance and motionless, stiffened body. With steady gaze
he awaited confidently the moment for administering the restorative.

When he believed that the right moment had arrived, he took the knife,
pried open the teeth, which offered less resistance than before, counted
one after the other twelve drops, and watched; the phial contained,
perhaps, twice as much more. He waited ten minutes, a quarter of an
hour, half an hour,--no change took place. Trembling, his hair erect,
his brow bathed with perspiration, he counted the seconds by the beating
of his heart. Then he thought it was time to make the last trial, and he
put the phial to the purple lips of Faria, and without having occasion
to force open his jaws, which had remained extended, he poured the whole
of the liquid down his throat.


The draught produced a galvanic effect, a violent trembling pervaded the
old man's limbs, his eyes opened until it was fearful to gaze upon them,
he heaved a sigh which resembled a shriek, and then his convulsed body
returned gradually to its former immobility, the eyes remaining open.

Half an hour, an hour, an hour and a half elapsed, and during this
period of anguish, Edmond leaned over his friend, his hand applied to
his heart, and felt the body gradually grow cold, and the heart's
pulsation become more and more deep and dull, until at length it
stopped; the last movement of the heart ceased, the face became livid,
the eyes remained open, but the eyeballs were glazed.

It was six o'clock in the morning, the dawn was just breaking, and its
feeble ray came into the dungeon, and paled the ineffectual light of the
lamp. Strange shadows passed over the countenance of the dead man, and
at times gave it the appearance of life. While the struggle between day
and night lasted, Dantès still doubted; but as soon as the daylight
gained the pre-eminence, he saw that he was alone with a corpse. Then an
invincible and extreme terror seized upon him, and he dared not again
press the hand that hung out of bed, he dared no longer to gaze on those
fixed and vacant eyes, which he tried many times to close, but in vain--
they opened again as soon as shut. He extinguished the lamp, carefully
concealed it, and then went away, closing as well as he could the
entrance to the secret passage by the large stone as he descended.

It was time, for the jailer was coming. On this occasion he began his
rounds at Dantès' cell, and on leaving him he went on to Faria's
dungeon, taking thither breakfast and some linen. Nothing betokened that
the man knew anything of what had occurred. He went on his way.

Dantès was then seized with an indescribable desire to know what was
going on in the dungeon of his unfortunate friend. He therefore returned
by the subterraneous gallery, and arrived in time to hear the
exclamations of the turnkey, who called out for help. Other turnkeys
came, and then was heard the regular tramp of soldiers. Last of all came
the governor.

Edmond heard the creaking of the bed as they moved the corpse, heard the
voice of the governor, who asked them to throw water on the dead man's
face; and seeing that, in spite of this application, the prisoner did
not recover, they sent for the doctor. The governor then went out, and
words of pity fell on Dantès' listening ears, mingled with brutal
laughter.

"Well, well," said one, "the madman has gone to look after his treasure.
Good journey to him!"

"With all his millions, he will not have enough to pay for his shroud!"
said another.

"Oh," added a third voice, "the shrouds of the Château d'If are not
dear!"

"Perhaps," said one of the previous speakers, "as he was a churchman,
they may go to some expense in his behalf."


"They may give him the honors of the sack."

Edmond did not lose a word, but comprehended very little of what was
said. The voices soon ceased, and it seemed to him as if everyone had
left the cell. Still he dared not to enter, as they might have left some
turnkey to watch the dead. He remained, therefore, mute and motionless,
hardly venturing to breathe. At the end of an hour, he heard a faint
noise, which increased. It was the governor who returned, followed by
the doctor and other attendants. There was a moment's silence,--it was
evident that the doctor was examining the dead body. The inquiries soon
commenced.

The doctor analyzed the symptoms of the malady to which the prisoner had
succumbed, and declared that he was dead. Questions and answers followed
in a nonchalant manner that made Dantès indignant, for he felt that all
the world should have for the poor abbé a love and respect equal to his
own.

"I am very sorry for what you tell me," said the governor, replying to
the assurance of the doctor, "that the old man is really dead; for he
was a quiet, inoffensive prisoner, happy in his folly, and required no
watching."

"Ah," added the turnkey, "there was no occasion for watching him: he
would have stayed here fifty years, I'll answer for it, without any
attempt to escape."

"Still," said the governor, "I believe it will be requisite,
notwithstanding your certainty, and not that I doubt your science, but
in discharge of my official duty, that we should be perfectly assured
that the prisoner is dead." There was a moment of complete silence,
during which Dantès, still listening, knew that the doctor was examining
the corpse a second time.

"You may make your mind easy," said the doctor; "he is dead. I will
answer for that."

"You know, sir," said the governor, persisting, "that we are not content
in such cases as this with such a simple examination. In spite of all
appearances, be so kind, therefore, as to finish your duty by fulfilling
the formalities described by law."

"Let the irons be heated," said the doctor; "but really it is a useless
precaution." This order to heat the irons made Dantès shudder. He heard
hasty steps, the creaking of a door, people going and coming, and some
minutes afterwards a turnkey entered, saying,--

"Here is the brazier, lighted." There was a moment's silence, and then
was heard the crackling of burning flesh, of which the peculiar and
nauseous smell penetrated even behind the wall where Dantès was
listening in horror. The perspiration poured forth upon the young man's
brow, and he felt as if he should faint.

"You see, sir, he is really dead," said the doctor; "this burn in the
heel is decisive. The poor fool is cured of his folly, and delivered
from his captivity."

"Wasn't his name Faria?" inquired one of the officers who accompanied
the governor.

"Yes, sir; and, as he said, it was an ancient name. He was, too, very
learned, and rational enough on all points which did not relate to his
treasure; but on that, indeed, he was intractable."

