resolve on starting for some particular point, and away I go." The count
rang, and a footman appeared. "Order out the carriage," he said, "and
remove the pistols which are in the holsters. You need not awaken the
coachman; Ali will drive." In a very short time the noise of wheels was
heard, and the carriage stopped at the door. The count took out his
watch. "Half-past twelve," he said. "We might start at five o'clock and
be in time, but the delay may cause your friend to pass an uneasy night,
and therefore we had better go with all speed to extricate him from the
hands of the infidels. Are you still resolved to accompany me?"

"More determined than ever."

"Well, then, come along."

Franz and the count went downstairs, accompanied by Peppino. At the door
they found the carriage. Ali was on the box, in whom Franz recognized
the dumb slave of the grotto of Monte Cristo. Franz and the count got
into the carriage. Peppino placed himself beside Ali, and they set off
at a rapid pace. Ali had received his instructions, and went down the
Corso, crossed the Campo Vaccino, went up the Strada San Gregorio, and
reached the gates of St. Sebastian. Then the porter raised some
difficulties, but the Count of Monte Cristo produced a permit from the
governor of Rome, allowing him to leave or enter the city at any hour of
the day or night; the portcullis was therefore raised, the porter had a
louis for his trouble, and they went on their way.

The road which the carriage now traversed was the ancient Appian Way,
and bordered with tombs. From time to time, by the light of the moon,
which began to rise, Franz imagined that he saw something like a
sentinel appear at various points among the ruins, and suddenly retreat
into the darkness on a signal from Peppino.

A short time before they reached the Baths of Caracalla the carriage
stopped, Peppino opened the door, and the count and Franz alighted.

"In ten minutes," said the count to his companion, "we shall be there."

He then took Peppino aside, gave him an order in a low voice, and
Peppino went away, taking with him a torch, brought with them in the
carriage. Five minutes elapsed, during which Franz saw the shepherd
going along a narrow path that led over the irregular and broken surface
of the Campagna; and finally he disappeared in the midst of the tall red
herbage, which seemed like the bristling mane of an enormous lion.

"Now," said the count, "let us follow him."

Franz and the count in their turn then advanced along the same path,
which, at the distance of a hundred paces, led them over a declivity to
the bottom of a small valley. They then perceived two men conversing in
the obscurity.

"Ought we to go on?" asked Franz of the count; "or shall we wait
awhile?"

"Let us go on; Peppino will have warned the sentry of our coming." One
of the two men was Peppino, and the other a bandit on the lookout. Franz
and the count advanced, and the bandit saluted them. "Your excellency,"
said Peppino, addressing the count, "if you will follow me, the opening
of the catacombs is close at hand."

"Go on, then," replied the count. They came to an opening behind a clump
of bushes and in the midst of a pile of rocks, by which a man could
scarcely pass. Peppino glided first into this crevice; after they got
along a few paces the passage widened. Peppino passed, lighted his
torch, and turned to see if they came after him. The count first reached
an open space and Franz followed him closely. The passageway sloped in a
gentle descent, enlarging as they proceeded; still Franz and the count
were compelled to advance in a stooping posture, and were scarcely able
to proceed abreast of one another. They went on a hundred and fifty
paces in this way, and then were stopped by, "Who comes there?" At the
same time they saw the reflection of a torch on a carbine barrel.

"A friend!" responded Peppino; and, advancing alone towards the sentry,
he said a few words to him in a low tone; and then he, like the first,
saluted the nocturnal visitors, making a sign that they might proceed.

Behind the sentinel was a staircase with twenty steps. Franz and the
count descended these, and found themselves in a mortuary chamber. Five
corridors diverged like the rays of a star, and the walls, dug into
niches, which were arranged one above the other in the shape of coffins,
showed that they were at last in the catacombs. Down one of the
corridors, whose extent it was impossible to determine, rays of light
were visible. The count laid his hand on Franz's shoulder.

"Would you like to see a camp of bandits in repose?" he inquired.

"Exceedingly," replied Franz.

"Come with me, then. Peppino, put out the torch." Peppino obeyed, and
Franz and the count were in utter darkness, except that fifty paces in
advance of them a reddish glare, more evident since Peppino had put out
his torch, was visible along the wall.

They advanced silently, the count guiding Franz as if he had the
singular faculty of seeing in the dark. Franz himself, however, saw his
way more plainly in proportion as he went on towards the light, which
served in some manner as a guide. Three arcades were before them, and
the middle one was used as a door. These arcades opened on one side into
the corridor where the count and Franz were, and on the other into a
large square chamber, entirely surrounded by niches similar to those of
which we have spoken.

In the midst of this chamber were four stones, which had formerly served
as an altar, as was evident from the cross which still surmounted them.
A lamp, placed at the base of a pillar, lighted up with its pale and
flickering flame the singular scene which presented itself to the eyes
of the two visitors concealed in the shadow.

A man was seated with his elbow leaning on the column, and was reading
with his back turned to the arcades, through the openings of which the
new-comers contemplated him. This was the chief of the band, Luigi
Vampa. Around him, and in groups, according to their fancy, lying in
their mantles, or with their backs against a sort of stone bench, which
went all round the columbarium, were to be seen twenty brigands or more,
each having his carbine within reach. At the other end, silent, scarcely
visible, and like a shadow, was a sentinel, who was walking up and down
before a grotto, which was only distinguishable because in that spot the
darkness seemed more dense than elsewhere.

When the count thought Franz had gazed sufficiently on this picturesque
tableau, he raised his finger to his lips, to warn him to be silent,
and, ascending the three steps which led to the corridor of the
columbarium, entered the chamber by the middle arcade, and advanced
towards Vampa, who was so intent on the book before him that he did not
hear the noise of his footsteps.

"Who comes there?" cried the sentinel, who was less abstracted, and who
saw by the lamp-light a shadow approaching his chief. At this challenge,
Vampa rose quickly, drawing at the same moment a pistol from his girdle.
In a moment all the bandits were on their feet, and twenty carbines were
levelled at the count.

"Well," said he in a voice perfectly calm, and no muscle of his
countenance disturbed, "well, my dear Vampa, it appears to me that you
receive a friend with a great deal of ceremony."


"Ground arms," exclaimed the chief, with an imperative sign of the hand,
while with the other he took off his hat respectfully; then, turning to
the singular personage who had caused this scene, he said, "Your pardon,
your excellency, but I was so far from expecting the honor of a visit,
that I did not really recognize you."

"It seems that your memory is equally short in everything, Vampa," said
the count, "and that not only do you forget people's faces, but also the
conditions you make with them."

"What conditions have I forgotten, your excellency?" inquired the
bandit, with the air of a man who, having committed an error, is anxious
to repair it.

"Was it not agreed," asked the count, "that not only my person, but also
that of my friends, should be respected by you?"

"And how have I broken that treaty, your excellency?"

"You have this evening carried off and conveyed hither the Vicomte
Albert de Morcerf. Well," continued the count, in a tone that made Franz
shudder, "this young gentleman is one of _my friends_--this young
gentleman lodges in the same hotel as myself--this young gentleman has
been up and down the Corso for eight hours in my private carriage, and
yet, I repeat to you, you have carried him off, and conveyed him hither,
and," added the count, taking the letter from his pocket, "you have set
a ransom on him, as if he were an utter stranger."

"Why did you not tell me all this--you?" inquired the brigand chief,
turning towards his men, who all retreated before his look. "Why have
you caused me thus to fail in my word towards a gentleman like the
count, who has all our lives in his hands? By heavens, if I thought one
of you knew that the young gentleman was the friend of his excellency, I
would blow his brains out with my own hand!"


"Well," said the count, turning towards Franz, "I told you there was
some mistake in this."

"Are you not alone?" asked Vampa with uneasiness.

"I am with the person to whom this letter was addressed, and to whom I
desired to prove that Luigi Vampa was a man of his word. Come, your
excellency," the count added, turning to Franz, "here is Luigi Vampa,
who will himself express to you his deep regret at the mistake he has
committed." Franz approached, the chief advancing several steps to meet
him.

"Welcome among us, your excellency," he said to him; "you heard what the
count just said, and also my reply; let me add that I would not for the
four thousand piastres at which I had fixed your friend's ransom, that
this had happened."

"But," said Franz, looking round him uneasily, "where is the Viscount?--
I do not see him."

"Nothing has happened to him, I hope," said the count frowningly.

"The prisoner is there," replied Vampa, pointing to the hollow space in
front of which the bandit was on guard, "and I will go myself and tell
him he is free." The chief went towards the place he had pointed out as
Albert's prison, and Franz and the count followed him. "What is the
prisoner doing?" inquired Vampa of the sentinel.
