land. The gloomy building rose from the bosom of the ocean with imposing
majesty and seemed to dominate the scene. It was about five o'clock. The
sea continued to get calmer.

"In two or three hours," thought Dantès, "the turnkey will enter my
chamber, find the body of my poor friend, recognize it, seek for me in
vain, and give the alarm. Then the tunnel will be discovered; the men
who cast me into the sea and who must have heard the cry I uttered, will
be questioned. Then boats filled with armed soldiers will pursue the
wretched fugitive. The cannon will warn everyone to refuse shelter to a
man wandering about naked and famished. The police of Marseilles will be
on the alert by land, whilst the governor pursues me by sea. I am cold,
I am hungry. I have lost even the knife that saved me. O my God, I have
suffered enough surely! Have pity on me, and do for me what I am unable
to do for myself."

As Dantès (his eyes turned in the direction of the Château d'If) uttered
this prayer, he saw off the farther point of the Island of Pomègue a
small vessel with lateen sail skimming the sea like a gull in search of
prey; and with his sailor's eye he knew it to be a Genoese tartan. She
was coming out of Marseilles harbor, and was standing out to sea
rapidly, her sharp prow cleaving through the waves. "Oh," cried Edmond,
"to think that in half an hour I could join her, did I not fear being
questioned, detected, and conveyed back to Marseilles! What can I do?
What story can I invent? under pretext of trading along the coast, these
men, who are in reality smugglers, will prefer selling me to doing a
good action. I must wait. But I cannot---- I am starving. In a few hours
my strength will be utterly exhausted; besides, perhaps I have not been
missed at the fortress. I can pass as one of the sailors wrecked last
night. My story will be accepted, for there is no one left to contradict
me."

As he spoke, Dantès looked toward the spot where the fishing-vessel had
been wrecked, and started. The red cap of one of the sailors hung to a
point of the rock and some timbers that had formed part of the vessel's
keel, floated at the foot of the crag. In an instant Dantès' plan was
formed. He swam to the cap, placed it on his head, seized one of the
timbers, and struck out so as to cut across the course the vessel was
taking.

"I am saved!" murmured he. And this conviction restored his strength.

He soon saw that the vessel, with the wind dead ahead, was tacking
between the Château d'If and the tower of Planier. For an instant he
feared lest, instead of keeping in shore, she should stand out to sea;
but he soon saw that she would pass, like most vessels bound for Italy,
between the islands of Jaros and Calaseraigne. However, the vessel and
the swimmer insensibly neared one another, and in one of its tacks the
tartan bore down within a quarter of a mile of him. He rose on the
waves, making signs of distress; but no one on board saw him, and the
vessel stood on another tack. Dantès would have shouted, but he knew
that the wind would drown his voice.

It was then he rejoiced at his precaution in taking the timber, for
without it he would have been unable, perhaps, to reach the vessel--
certainly to return to shore, should he be unsuccessful in attracting
attention.

Dantès, though almost sure as to what course the vessel would take, had
yet watched it anxiously until it tacked and stood towards him. Then he
advanced; but before they could meet, the vessel again changed her
course. By a violent effort he rose half out of the water, waving his
cap, and uttering a loud shout peculiar to sailors. This time he was
both seen and heard, and the tartan instantly steered towards him. At
the same time, he saw they were about to lower the boat.

An instant after, the boat, rowed by two men, advanced rapidly towards
him. Dantès let go of the timber, which he now thought to be useless,
and swam vigorously to meet them. But he had reckoned too much upon his
strength, and then he realized how serviceable the timber had been to
him. His arms became stiff, his legs lost their flexibility, and he was
almost breathless.

He shouted again. The two sailors redoubled their efforts, and one of
them cried in Italian, "Courage!"

The word reached his ear as a wave which he no longer had the strength
to surmount passed over his head. He rose again to the surface,
struggled with the last desperate effort of a drowning man, uttered a
third cry, and felt himself sinking, as if the fatal cannon shot were
again tied to his feet. The water passed over his head, and the sky
turned gray. A convulsive movement again brought him to the surface. He
felt himself seized by the hair, then he saw and heard nothing. He had
fainted.

When he opened his eyes Dantès found himself on the deck of the tartan.
His first care was to see what course they were taking. They were
rapidly leaving the Château d'If behind. Dantès was so exhausted that
the exclamation of joy he uttered was mistaken for a sigh.

As we have said, he was lying on the deck. A sailor was rubbing his
limbs with a woollen cloth; another, whom he recognized as the one who
had cried out "Courage!" held a gourd full of rum to his mouth; while
the third, an old sailor, at once the pilot and captain, looked on with
that egotistical pity men feel for a misfortune that they have escaped
yesterday, and which may overtake them tomorrow.

A few drops of the rum restored suspended animation, while the friction
of his limbs restored their elasticity.

"Who are you?" said the pilot in bad French.

"I am," replied Dantès, in bad Italian, "a Maltese sailor. We were
coming from Syracuse laden with grain. The storm of last night overtook
us at Cape Morgiou, and we were wrecked on these rocks."

"Where do you come from?"

"From these rocks that I had the good luck to cling to while our captain
and the rest of the crew were all lost. I saw your vessel, and fearful
of being left to perish on the desolate island, I swam off on a piece of
wreckage to try and intercept your course. You have saved my life, and I
thank you," continued Dantès. "I was lost when one of your sailors
caught hold of my hair."

"It was I," said a sailor of a frank and manly appearance; "and it was
time, for you were sinking."

"Yes," returned Dantès, holding out his hand, "I thank you again."

"I almost hesitated, though," replied the sailor; "you looked more like
a brigand than an honest man, with your beard six inches, and your hair
a foot long." Dantès recollected that his hair and beard had not been
cut all the time he was at the Château d'If.

"Yes," said he, "I made a vow, to our Lady of the Grotto not to cut my
hair or beard for ten years if I were saved in a moment of danger; but
today the vow expires."

"Now what are we to do with you?" said the captain.

"Alas, anything you please. My captain is dead; I have barely escaped;
but I am a good sailor. Leave me at the first port you make; I shall be
sure to find employment."

"Do you know the Mediterranean?"

"I have sailed over it since my childhood."

"You know the best harbors?"

"There are few ports that I could not enter or leave with a bandage over
my eyes."

"I say, captain," said the sailor who had cried "Courage!" to Dantès,
"if what he says is true, what hinders his staying with us?"

"If he says true," said the captain doubtingly. "But in his present
condition he will promise anything, and take his chance of keeping it
afterwards."

"I will do more than I promise," said Dantès.

"We shall see," returned the other, smiling.

"Where are you going?" asked Dantès.

"To Leghorn."

"Then why, instead of tacking so frequently, do you not sail nearer the
wind?"

"Because we should run straight on to the Island of Rion."

"You shall pass it by twenty fathoms."

"Take the helm, and let us see what you know." The young man took the
helm, felt to see if the vessel answered the rudder promptly and seeing
that, without being a first-rate sailor, she yet was tolerably
obedient,--

"To the sheets," said he. The four seamen, who composed the crew,
obeyed, while the pilot looked on. "Haul taut."--They obeyed.

"Belay." This order was also executed; and the vessel passed, as Dantès
had predicted, twenty fathoms to windward.

"Bravo!" said the captain.

"Bravo!" repeated the sailors. And they all looked with astonishment at
this man whose eye now disclosed an intelligence and his body a vigor
they had not thought him capable of showing.

"You see," said Dantès, quitting the helm, "I shall be of some use to
you, at least during the voyage. If you do not want me at Leghorn, you
can leave me there, and I will pay you out of the first wages I get, for
my food and the clothes you lend me."

"Ah," said the captain, "we can agree very well, if you are reasonable."

"Give me what you give the others, and it will be all right," returned
Dantès.

"That's not fair," said the seaman who had saved Dantès; "for you know
more than we do."

"What is that to you, Jacopo?" returned the Captain. "Everyone is free
to ask what he pleases."

"That's true," replied Jacopo; "I only make a remark."
