"You are deceived, Morrel, that woman----"

"She was dead?"

"Worse than that, she was faithless, and had married one of the
persecutors of her betrothed. You see, then, Morrel, that he was a more
unhappy lover than you."

"And has he found consolation?"

"He has at least found peace."

"And does he ever expect to be happy?"

"He hopes so, Maximilian." The young man's head fell on his breast.

"You have my promise," he said, after a minute's pause, extending his
hand to Monte Cristo. "Only remember----"

"On the 5th of October, Morrel, I shall expect you at the Island of
Monte Cristo. On the 4th a yacht will wait for you in the port of
Bastia, it will be called the _Eurus_. You will give your name to the
captain, who will bring you to me. It is understood--is it not?"

"But, count, do you remember that the 5th of October----"

"Child," replied the count, "not to know the value of a man's word! I
have told you twenty times that if you wish to die on that day, I will
assist you. Morrel, farewell!"

"Do you leave me?"

"Yes; I have business in Italy. I leave you alone with your misfortunes,
and with hope, Maximilian."

"When do you leave?"

"Immediately; the steamer waits, and in an hour I shall be far from you.
Will you accompany me to the harbor, Maximilian?"


"I am entirely yours, count." Morrel accompanied the count to the
harbor. The white steam was ascending like a plume of feathers from the
black chimney. The steamer soon disappeared, and in an hour afterwards,
as the count had said, was scarcely distinguishable in the horizon
amidst the fogs of the night.



Chapter 114. Peppino

At the same time that the steamer disappeared behind Cape Morgion, a man
travelling post on the road from Florence to Rome had just passed the
little town of Aquapendente. He was travelling fast enough to cover a
great deal of ground without exciting suspicion. This man was dressed in
a greatcoat, or rather a surtout, a little worse for the journey, but
which exhibited the ribbon of the Legion of Honor still fresh and
brilliant, a decoration which also ornamented the under coat. He might
be recognized, not only by these signs, but also from the accent with
which he spoke to the postilion, as a Frenchman. Another proof that he
was a native of the universal country was apparent in the fact of his
knowing no other Italian words than the terms used in music, and which
like the "goddam" of Figaro, served all possible linguistic
requirements. "_Allegro!_" he called out to the postilions at every
ascent. "_Moderato!_" he cried as they descended. And heaven knows there
are hills enough between Rome and Florence by the way of Aquapendente!
These two words greatly amused the men to whom they were addressed. On
reaching La Storta, the point from whence Rome is first visible, the
traveller evinced none of the enthusiastic curiosity which usually leads
strangers to stand up and endeavor to catch sight of the dome of Saint
Peter's, which may be seen long before any other object is
distinguishable. No, he merely drew a pocketbook from his pocket, and
took from it a paper folded in four, and after having examined it in a
manner almost reverential, he said--"Good! I have it still!"


The carriage entered by the Porto del Popolo, turned to the left, and
stopped at the Hôtel d'Espagne. Old Pastrini, our former acquaintance,
received the traveller at the door, hat in hand. The traveller alighted,
ordered a good dinner, and inquired the address of the house of Thomson
& French, which was immediately given to him, as it was one of the most
celebrated in Rome. It was situated in the Via dei Banchi, near St.
Peter's. In Rome, as everywhere else, the arrival of a post-chaise is an
event. Ten young descendants of Marius and the Gracchi, barefooted and
out at elbows, with one hand resting on the hip and the other gracefully
curved above the head, stared at the traveller, the post-chaise, and the
horses; to these were added about fifty little vagabonds from the Papal
States, who earned a pittance by diving into the Tiber at high water
from the bridge of St. Angelo. Now, as these street Arabs of Rome, more
fortunate than those of Paris, understand every language, more
especially the French, they heard the traveller order an apartment, a
dinner, and finally inquire the way to the house of Thomson & French.
The result was that when the new-comer left the hotel with the
_cicerone_, a man detached himself from the rest of the idlers, and
without having been seen by the traveller, and appearing to excite no
attention from the guide, followed the stranger with as much skill as a
Parisian police agent would have used.

The Frenchman had been so impatient to reach the house of Thomson &
French that he would not wait for the horses to be harnessed, but left
word for the carriage to overtake him on the road, or to wait for him at
the bankers' door. He reached it before the carriage arrived. The
Frenchman entered, leaving in the anteroom his guide, who immediately
entered into conversation with two or three of the industrious idlers
who are always to be found in Rome at the doors of banking-houses,
churches, museums, or theatres. With the Frenchman, the man who had
followed him entered too; the Frenchman knocked at the inner door, and
entered the first room; his shadow did the same.

"Messrs. Thomson & French?" inquired the stranger.

An attendant arose at a sign from a confidential clerk at the first
desk. "Whom shall I announce?" said the attendant.

"Baron Danglars."

"Follow me," said the man. A door opened, through which the attendant
and the baron disappeared. The man who had followed Danglars sat down on
a bench. The clerk continued to write for the next five minutes; the man
preserved profound silence, and remained perfectly motionless. Then the
pen of the clerk ceased to move over the paper; he raised his head, and
appearing to be perfectly sure of privacy,--"Ah, ha," he said, "here you
are, Peppino!"

"Yes," was the laconic reply. "You have found out that there is
something worth having about this large gentleman?"

"There is no great merit due to me, for we were informed of it."

"You know his business here, then."

"_Pardieu_, he has come to draw, but I don't know how much!"

"You will know presently, my friend."

"Very well, only do not give me false information as you did the other
day."


"What do you mean?--of whom do you speak? Was it the Englishman who
carried off 3,000 crowns from here the other day?"

"No; he really had 3,000 crowns, and we found them. I mean the Russian
prince, who you said had 30,000 livres, and we only found 22,000."

"You must have searched badly."

"Luigi Vampa himself searched."

"Indeed? But you must let me make my observations, or the Frenchman will
transact his business without my knowing the sum." Peppino nodded, and
taking a rosary from his pocket began to mutter a few prayers while the
clerk disappeared through the same door by which Danglars and the
attendant had gone out. At the expiration of ten minutes the clerk
returned with a beaming countenance. "Well?" asked Peppino of his
friend.

"Joy, joy--the sum is large!"

"Five or six millions, is it not?"

"Yes, you know the amount."

"On the receipt of the Count of Monte Cristo?"

"Why, how came you to be so well acquainted with all this?"

"I told you we were informed beforehand."

"Then why do you apply to me?"

"That I may be sure I have the right man."

"Yes, it is indeed he. Five millions--a pretty sum, eh, Peppino?"

"Hush--here is our man!" The clerk seized his pen, and Peppino his
beads; one was writing and the other praying when the door opened.
Danglars looked radiant with joy; the banker accompanied him to the
door. Peppino followed Danglars.

According to the arrangements, the carriage was waiting at the door. The
guide held the door open. Guides are useful people, who will turn their
hands to anything. Danglars leaped into the carriage like a young man of
twenty. The _cicerone_ reclosed the door, and sprang up by the side of
the coachman. Peppino mounted the seat behind.

"Will your excellency visit Saint Peter's?" asked the _cicerone_.

"I did not come to Rome to see," said Danglars aloud; then he added
softly, with an avaricious smile, "I came to touch!" and he rapped his
pocket-book, in which he had just placed a letter.

"Then your excellency is going----"

"To the hotel."


"Casa Pastrini!" said the _cicerone_ to the coachman, and the carriage
drove rapidly on. Ten minutes afterwards the baron entered his
apartment, and Peppino stationed himself on the bench outside the door
