a philosopher, should like a little country-house, a cottage down there
under the trees, without so many free-stones over my poor body. In
dying, I will say to those around me what Voltaire wrote to Piron: '_Eo
rus_, and all will be over.' But come, Franz, take courage, your wife is
an heiress."

"Indeed, Beauchamp, you are unbearable. Politics has made you laugh at
everything, and political men have made you disbelieve everything. But
when you have the honor of associating with ordinary men, and the
pleasure of leaving politics for a moment, try to find your affectionate
heart, which you leave with your stick when you go to the Chamber."


"But tell me," said Beauchamp, "what is life? Is it not a halt in
Death's anteroom?"

"I am prejudiced against Beauchamp," said Albert, drawing Franz away,
and leaving the former to finish his philosophical dissertation with
Debray. The Villefort vault formed a square of white stones, about
twenty feet high; an interior partition separated the two families, and
each apartment had its entrance door. Here were not, as in other tombs,
ignoble drawers, one above another, where thrift bestows its dead and
labels them like specimens in a museum; all that was visible within the
bronze gates was a gloomy-looking room, separated by a wall from the
vault itself. The two doors before mentioned were in the middle of this
wall, and enclosed the Villefort and Saint-Méran coffins. There grief
might freely expend itself without being disturbed by the trifling
loungers who came from a picnic party to visit Père-Lachaise, or by
lovers who make it their rendezvous.

The two coffins were placed on trestles previously prepared for their
reception in the right-hand crypt belonging to the Saint-Méran family.
Villefort, Franz, and a few near relatives alone entered the sanctuary.

As the religious ceremonies had all been performed at the door, and
there was no address given, the party all separated; Château-Renaud,
Albert, and Morrel, went one way, and Debray and Beauchamp the other.
Franz remained with M. de Villefort; at the gate of the cemetery, Morrel
made an excuse to wait; he saw Franz and M. de Villefort get into the
same mourning coach, and thought this meeting forboded evil. He then
returned to Paris, and although in the same carriage with Château-Renaud
and Albert, he did not hear one word of their conversation. As Franz was
about to take leave of M. de Villefort, "When shall I see you again?"
said the latter.

"At what time you please, sir," replied Franz.

"As soon as possible."

"I am at your command, sir; shall we return together?"

"If not unpleasant to you."

"On the contrary, I shall feel much pleasure." Thus, the future father
and son-in-law stepped into the same carriage, and Morrel, seeing them
pass, became uneasy. Villefort and Franz returned to the Faubourg Saint-
Honoré. The procureur, without going to see either his wife or his
daughter, went at once to his study, and, offering the young man a
chair,--"M. d'Epinay," said he, "allow me to remind you at this moment,-
-which is perhaps not so ill-chosen as at first sight may appear, for
obedience to the wishes of the departed is the first offering which
should be made at their tomb,--allow me then to remind you of the wish
expressed by Madame de Saint-Méran on her death-bed, that Valentine's
wedding might not be deferred. You know the affairs of the deceased are
in perfect order, and her will bequeaths to Valentine the entire
property of the Saint-Méran family; the notary showed me the documents
yesterday, which will enable us to draw up the contract immediately. You
may call on the notary, M. Deschamps, Place Beauveau, Faubourg Saint-
Honoré, and you have my authority to inspect those deeds."

"Sir," replied M. d'Epinay, "it is not, perhaps, the moment for
Mademoiselle Valentine, who is in deep distress, to think of a husband;
indeed, I fear----"


"Valentine will have no greater pleasure than that of fulfilling her
grandmother's last injunctions; there will be no obstacle from that
quarter, I assure you."

"In that case," replied Franz, "as I shall raise none, you may make
arrangements when you please; I have pledged my word, and shall feel
pleasure and happiness in adhering to it."

"Then," said Villefort, "nothing further is required. The contract was
to have been signed three days since; we shall find it all ready, and
can sign it today."

"But the mourning?" said Franz, hesitating.

"Don't be uneasy on that score," replied Villefort; "no ceremony will be
neglected in my house. Mademoiselle de Villefort may retire during the
prescribed three months to her estate of Saint-Méran; I say hers, for
she inherits it today. There, after a few days, if you like, the civil
marriage shall be celebrated without pomp or ceremony. Madame de Saint-
Méran wished her daughter should be married there. When that is over,
you, sir, can return to Paris, while your wife passes the time of her
mourning with her mother-in-law."

"As you please, sir," said Franz.

"Then," replied M. de Villefort, "have the kindness to wait half an
hour; Valentine shall come down into the drawing-room. I will send for
M. Deschamps; we will read and sign the contract before we separate, and
this evening Madame de Villefort shall accompany Valentine to her
estate, where we will rejoin them in a week."

"Sir," said Franz, "I have one request to make."

"What is it?"

"I wish Albert de Morcerf and Raoul de Château-Renaud to be present at
this signature; you know they are my witnesses."

"Half an hour will suffice to apprise them; will you go for them
yourself, or shall you send?"

"I prefer going, sir."

"I shall expect you, then, in half an hour, baron, and Valentine will be
ready." Franz bowed and left the room. Scarcely had the door closed,
when M. de Villefort sent to tell Valentine to be ready in the drawing-
room in half an hour, as he expected the notary and M. d'Epinay and his
witnesses. The news caused a great sensation throughout the house;
Madame de Villefort would not believe it, and Valentine was
thunderstruck. She looked around for help, and would have gone down to
her grandfather's room, but on the stairs she met M. de Villefort, who
took her arm and led her into the drawing-room. In the anteroom,
Valentine met Barrois, and looked despairingly at the old servant. A
moment later, Madame de Villefort entered the drawing-room with her
little Edward. It was evident that she had shared the grief of the
family, for she was pale and looked fatigued. She sat down, took Edward
on her knees, and from time to time pressed this child, on whom her
affections appeared centred, almost convulsively to her bosom.

Two carriages were soon heard to enter the courtyard. One was the
notary's; the other, that of Franz and his friends. In a moment the
whole party was assembled. Valentine was so pale one might trace the
blue veins from her temples, round her eyes and down her cheeks. Franz
was deeply affected. Château-Renaud and Albert looked at each other with
amazement; the ceremony which was just concluded had not appeared more
sorrowful than did that which was about to begin. Madame de Villefort
had placed herself in the shadow behind a velvet curtain, and as she
constantly bent over her child, it was difficult to read the expression
of her face. M. de Villefort was, as usual, unmoved.

The notary, after having, according to the customary method, arranged
the papers on the table, taken his place in an armchair, and raised his
spectacles, turned towards Franz:

"Are you M. Franz de Quesnel, baron d'Epinay?" asked he, although he
knew it perfectly.

"Yes, sir," replied Franz. The notary bowed.

"I have, then, to inform you, sir, at the request of M. de Villefort,
that your projected marriage with Mademoiselle de Villefort has changed
the feeling of M. Noirtier towards his grandchild, and that he
disinherits her entirely of the fortune he would have left her. Let me
hasten to add," continued he, "that the testator, having only the right
to alienate a part of his fortune, and having alienated it all, the will
will not bear scrutiny, and is declared null and void."

"Yes." said Villefort; "but I warn M. d'Epinay, that during my life-time
my father's will shall never be questioned, my position forbidding any
doubt to be entertained."


"Sir," said Franz, "I regret much that such a question has been raised
in the presence of Mademoiselle Valentine; I have never inquired the
amount of her fortune, which, however limited it may be, exceeds mine.
My family has sought consideration in this alliance with M. de
Villefort; all I seek is happiness." Valentine imperceptibly thanked
him, while two silent tears rolled down her cheeks. "Besides, sir," said
Villefort, addressing himself to his future son-in-law, "excepting the
loss of a portion of your hopes, this unexpected will need not
personally wound you; M. Noirtier's weakness of mind sufficiently
explains it. It is not because Mademoiselle Valentine is going to marry
you that he is angry, but because she will marry, a union with any other
would have caused him the same sorrow. Old age is selfish, sir, and
Mademoiselle de Villefort has been a faithful companion to M. Noirtier,
which she cannot be when she becomes the Baroness d'Epinay. My father's
melancholy state prevents our speaking to him on any subjects, which the
weakness of his mind would incapacitate him from understanding, and I am
perfectly convinced that at the present time, although, he knows that
his granddaughter is going to be married, M. Noirtier has even forgotten
the name of his intended grandson." M. de Villefort had scarcely said
this, when the door opened, and Barrois appeared.

"Gentlemen," said he, in a tone strangely firm for a servant speaking to
his masters under such solemn circumstances,--"gentlemen, M. Noirtier de
Villefort wishes to speak immediately to M. Franz de Quesnel, baron
d'Epinay;" he, as well as the notary, that there might be no mistake in
the person, gave all his titles to the bridegroom elect.

Villefort started, Madame de Villefort let her son slip from her knees,
Valentine rose, pale and dumb as a statue. Albert and Château-Renaud
exchanged a second look, more full of amazement than the first. The
notary looked at Villefort. "It is impossible," said the procureur. "M.
d'Epinay cannot leave the drawing-room at present."

