penetrate to the very soul, and the haughty and disdainful upper lip
that gives to the words it utters a peculiar character that impresses
them on the minds of those to whom they are addressed. The count was no
longer young. He was at least forty; and yet it was easy to understand
that he was formed to rule the young men with whom he associated at
present. And, to complete his resemblance with the fantastic heroes of
the English poet, the count seemed to have the power of fascination.
Albert was constantly expatiating on their good fortune in meeting such
a man. Franz was less enthusiastic; but the count exercised over him
also the ascendency a strong mind always acquires over a mind less
domineering. He thought several times of the project the count had of
visiting Paris; and he had no doubt but that, with his eccentric
character, his characteristic face, and his colossal fortune, he would
produce a great effect there. And yet he did not wish to be at Paris
when the count was there.

The evening passed as evenings mostly pass at Italian theatres; that is,
not in listening to the music, but in paying visits and conversing. The
Countess G---- wished to revive the subject of the count, but Franz
announced he had something far newer to tell her, and, in spite of
Albert's demonstrations of false modesty, he informed the countess of
the great event which had preoccupied them for the last three days. As
similar intrigues are not uncommon in Italy, if we may credit
travellers, the comtess did not manifest the least incredulity, but
congratulated Albert on his success. They promised, upon separating, to
meet at the Duke of Bracciano's ball, to which all Rome was invited. The
heroine of the bouquet kept her word; she gave Albert no sign of her
existence the morrow or the day after.

At length Tuesday came, the last and most tumultuous day of the
Carnival. On Tuesday, the theatres open at ten o'clock in the morning,
as Lent begins after eight at night. On Tuesday, all those who through
want of money, time, or enthusiasm, have not been to see the Carnival
before, mingle in the gayety, and contribute to the noise and
excitement. From two o'clock till five Franz and Albert followed in the
_fête_, exchanging handfuls of _confetti_ with the other carriages and
the pedestrians, who crowded amongst the horses' feet and the carriage
wheels without a single accident, a single dispute, or a single fight.
The _fêtes_ are veritable pleasure days to the Italians. The author of
this history, who has resided five or six years in Italy, does not
recollect to have ever seen a ceremony interrupted by one of those
events so common in other countries. Albert was triumphant in his
harlequin costume. A knot of rose-colored ribbons fell from his shoulder
almost to the ground. In order that there might be no confusion, Franz
wore his peasant's costume.

As the day advanced, the tumult became greater. There was not on the
pavement, in the carriages, at the windows, a single tongue that was
silent, a single arm that did not move. It was a human storm, made up of
a thunder of cries, and a hail of sweetmeats, flowers, eggs, oranges,
and nosegays.

At three o'clock the sound of fireworks, let off on the Piazza del
Popolo and the Piazza di Venezia (heard with difficulty amid the din and
confusion) announced that the races were about to begin.

The races, like the _moccoli_, are one of the episodes peculiar to the
last days of the Carnival. At the sound of the fireworks the carriages
instantly broke ranks, and retired by the adjacent streets. All these
evolutions are executed with an inconceivable address and marvellous
rapidity, without the police interfering in the matter. The pedestrians
ranged themselves against the walls; then the trampling of horses and
the clashing of steel were heard. A detachment of carbineers, fifteen
abreast, galloped up the Corso in order to clear it for the _barberi_.
When the detachment arrived at the Piazza di Venezia, a second volley of
fireworks was discharged, to announce that the street was clear.

Almost instantly, in the midst of a tremendous and general outcry, seven
or eight horses, excited by the shouts of three hundred thousand
spectators, passed by like lightning. Then the Castle of Saint Angelo
fired three cannon to indicate that number three had won. Immediately,
without any other signal, the carriages moved on, flowing on towards the
Corso, down all the streets, like torrents pent up for a while, which
again flow into the parent river; and the immense stream again continued
its course between its two granite banks.

A new source of noise and movement was added to the crowd. The sellers
of _moccoletti_ entered on the scene. The _moccoli_, or _moccoletti_,
are candles which vary in size from the pascal taper to the rushlight,
and which give to each actor in the great final scene of the Carnival
two very serious problems to grapple with,--first, how to keep his own
_moccoletto_ alight; and secondly, how to extinguish the _moccoletti_ of
others. The _moccoletto_ is like life: man has found but one means of
transmitting it, and that one comes from God. But he has discovered a
thousand means of taking it away, and the devil has somewhat aided him.
The _moccoletto_ is kindled by approaching it to a light. But who can
describe the thousand means of extinguishing the _moccoletto_?--the
gigantic bellows, the monstrous extinguishers, the superhuman fans.
Everyone hastened to purchase _moccoletti_--Franz and Albert among the
rest.

The night was rapidly approaching; and already, at the cry of
"_Moccoletti_!" repeated by the shrill voices of a thousand vendors, two
or three stars began to burn among the crowd. It was a signal. At the
end of ten minutes fifty thousand lights glittered, descending from the
Palazzo di Venezia to the Piazza del Popolo, and mounting from the
Piazzo del Popolo to the Palazzo di Venezia. It seemed like the _fête_
of jack-o'-lanterns.

It is impossible to form any idea of it without having seen it. Suppose
that all the stars had descended from the sky and mingled in a wild
dance on the face of the earth; the whole accompanied by cries that were
never heard in any other part of the world. The _facchino_ follows the
prince, the Transteverin the citizen, everyone blowing, extinguishing,
relighting. Had old Æolus appeared at this moment, he would have been
proclaimed king of the _moccoli_, and Aquilo the heir-presumptive to the
throne.

This battle of folly and flame continued for two hours; the Corso was
light as day; the features of the spectators on the third and fourth
stories were visible.

Every five minutes Albert took out his watch; at length it pointed to
seven. The two friends were in the Via dei Pontefici. Albert sprang out,
bearing his _moccoletto_ in his hand. Two or three masks strove to knock
his _moccoletto_ out of his hand; but Albert, a first-rate pugilist,
sent them rolling in the street, one after the other, and continued his
course towards the church of San Giacomo.

The steps were crowded with masks, who strove to snatch each other's
torches. Franz followed Albert with his eyes, and saw him mount the
first step. Instantly a mask, wearing the well-known costume of a
peasant woman, snatched his _moccoletto_ from him without his offering
any resistance. Franz was too far off to hear what they said; but,
without doubt, nothing hostile passed, for he saw Albert disappear arm-
in-arm with the peasant girl. He watched them pass through the crowd for
some time, but at length he lost sight of them in the Via Macello.
Suddenly the bell that gives the signal for the end of the carnival
sounded, and at the same instant all the _moccoletti_ were extinguished
as if by enchantment. It seemed as though one immense blast of the wind
had extinguished everyone.

Franz found himself in utter darkness. No sound was audible save that of
the carriages that were carrying the maskers home; nothing was visible
save a few lights that burnt behind the windows. The Carnival was over.



Chapter 37. The Catacombs of Saint Sebastian

In his whole life, perhaps, Franz had never before experienced so sudden
an impression, so rapid a transition from gayety to sadness, as in this
moment. It seemed as though Rome, under the magic breath of some demon
of the night, had suddenly changed into a vast tomb. By a chance, which
added yet more to the intensity of the darkness, the moon, which was on
the wane, did not rise until eleven o'clock, and the streets which the
young man traversed were plunged in the deepest obscurity.

The distance was short, and at the end of ten minutes his carriage, or
rather the count's, stopped before the Hôtel de Londres.

Dinner was waiting, but as Albert had told him that he should not return
so soon, Franz sat down without him. Signor Pastrini, who had been
accustomed to see them dine together, inquired into the cause of his
absence, but Franz merely replied that Albert had received on the
previous evening an invitation which he had accepted.

The sudden extinction of the _moccoletti_, the darkness which had
replaced the light, and the silence which had succeeded the turmoil, had
left in Franz's mind a certain depression which was not free from
uneasiness. He therefore dined very silently, in spite of the officious
attention of his host, who presented himself two or three times to
inquire if he wanted anything.

Franz resolved to wait for Albert as late as possible. He ordered the
carriage, therefore, for eleven o'clock, desiring Signor Pastrini to
inform him the moment that Albert returned to the hotel.

At eleven o'clock Albert had not come back. Franz dressed himself, and
went out, telling his host that he was going to pass the night at the
Duke of Bracciano's. The house of the Duke of Bracciano is one of the
most delightful in Rome, the duchess, one of the last heiresses of the
Colonnas, does its honors with the most consummate grace, and thus their
_fêtes_ have a European celebrity.

Franz and Albert had brought to Rome letters of introduction to them,
and their first question on his arrival was to inquire the whereabouts
of his travelling companion. Franz replied that he had left him at the
moment they were about to extinguish the _moccoli_, and that he had lost
sight of him in the Via Macello.

"Then he has not returned?" said the duke.

"I waited for him until this hour," replied Franz.

"And do you know whither he went?"

"No, not precisely; however, I think it was something very like a
rendezvous."

"_Diavolo!_" said the duke, "this is a bad day, or rather a bad night,
to be out late; is it not, countess!" These words were addressed to the
Countess G----, who had just arrived, and was leaning on the arm of
Signor Torlonia, the duke's brother.

"I think, on the contrary, that it is a charming night," replied the
countess, "and those who are here will complain of but one thing--its
too rapid flight."

"I am not speaking," said the duke with a smile, "of the persons who are
