
"Then I should advise you to leave off wearing that style of dress."

"Indeed," said the major, regarding himself with an air of complete
satisfaction.

"Yes. It may be worn at Via Reggio; but that costume, however elegant in
itself, has long been out of fashion in Paris."

"That's unfortunate."

"Oh, if you really are attached to your old mode of dress; you can
easily resume it when you leave Paris."

"But what shall I wear?"

"What you find in your trunks."

"In my trunks? I have but one portmanteau."

"I dare say you have nothing else with you. What is the use of boring
one's self with so many things? Besides an old soldier always likes to
march with as little baggage as possible."

"That is just the case--precisely so."

"But you are a man of foresight and prudence, therefore you sent your
luggage on before you. It has arrived at the Hôtel des Princes, Rue de
Richelieu. It is there you are to take up your quarters."

"Then, in these trunks----"

"I presume you have given orders to your valet de chambre to put in all
you are likely to need,--your plain clothes and your uniform. On grand
occasions you must wear your uniform; that will look very well. Do not
forget your crosses. They still laugh at them in France, and yet always
wear them, for all that."

"Very well, very well," said the major, who was in ecstasy at the
attention paid him by the count.

"Now," said Monte Cristo, "that you have fortified yourself against all
painful excitement, prepare yourself, my dear M. Cavalcanti, to meet
your lost Andrea." Saying which Monte Cristo bowed, and disappeared
behind the tapestry, leaving the major fascinated beyond expression with
the delightful reception which he had received at the hands of the
count.



Chapter 56. Andrea Cavalcanti

The Count of Monte Cristo entered the adjoining room, which Baptistin
had designated as the drawing-room, and found there a young man, of
graceful demeanor and elegant appearance, who had arrived in a cab about
half an hour previously. Baptistin had not found any difficulty in
recognizing the person who presented himself at the door for admittance.
He was certainly the tall young man with light hair, red beard, black
eyes, and brilliant complexion, whom his master had so particularly
described to him. When the count entered the room the young man was
carelessly stretched on a sofa, tapping his boot with the gold-headed
cane which he held in his hand. On perceiving the count he rose quickly.
"The Count of Monte Cristo, I believe?" said he.

"Yes, sir, and I think I have the honor of addressing Count Andrea
Cavalcanti?"

"Count Andrea Cavalcanti," repeated the young man, accompanying his
words with a bow.

"You are charged with a letter of introduction addressed to me, are you
not?" said the count.

"I did not mention that, because the signature seemed to me so strange."

"The letter signed 'Sinbad the Sailor,' is it not?"

"Exactly so. Now, as I have never known any Sinbad, with the exception
of the one celebrated in the _Thousand and One Nights_----"

"Well, it is one of his descendants, and a great friend of mine; he is a
very rich Englishman, eccentric almost to insanity, and his real name is
Lord Wilmore."

"Ah, indeed? Then that explains everything that is extraordinary," said
Andrea. "He is, then, the same Englishman whom I met--at--ah--yes,
indeed. Well, monsieur, I am at your service."

"If what you say be true," replied the count, smiling, "perhaps you will
be kind enough to give me some account of yourself and your family?"

"Certainly, I will do so," said the young man, with a quickness which
gave proof of his ready invention. "I am (as you have said) the Count
Andrea Cavalcanti, son of Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti, a descendant of
the Cavalcanti whose names are inscribed in the golden book at Florence.
Our family, although still rich (for my father's income amounts to half
a million), has experienced many misfortunes, and I myself was, at the
age of five years, taken away by the treachery of my tutor, so that for
fifteen years I have not seen the author of my existence. Since I have
arrived at years of discretion and become my own master, I have been
constantly seeking him, but all in vain. At length I received this
letter from your friend, which states that my father is in Paris, and
authorizes me to address myself to you for information respecting him."

"Really, all you have related to me is exceedingly interesting," said
Monte Cristo, observing the young man with a gloomy satisfaction; "and
you have done well to conform in everything to the wishes of my friend
Sinbad; for your father is indeed here, and is seeking you."

The count from the moment of first entering the drawing-room, had not
once lost sight of the expression of the young man's countenance; he had
admired the assurance of his look and the firmness of his voice; but at
these words, so natural in themselves, "Your father is indeed here, and
is seeking you," young Andrea started, and exclaimed, "My father? Is my
father here?"

"Most undoubtedly," replied Monte Cristo; "your father, Major Bartolomeo
Cavalcanti." The expression of terror which, for the moment, had
overspread the features of the young man, had now disappeared. "Ah, yes,
that is the name, certainly. Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti. And you really
mean to say; monsieur, that my dear father is here?"

"Yes, sir; and I can even add that I have only just left his company.
The history which he related to me of his lost son touched me to the
quick; indeed, his griefs, hopes, and fears on that subject might
furnish material for a most touching and pathetic poem. At length, he
one day received a letter, stating that the abductors of his son now
offered to restore him, or at least to give notice where he might be
found, on condition of receiving a large sum of money, by way of ransom.
Your father did not hesitate an instant, and the sum was sent to the
frontier of Piedmont, with a passport signed for Italy. You were in the
south of France, I think?"

"Yes," replied Andrea, with an embarrassed air, "I was in the south of
France."

"A carriage was to await you at Nice?"

"Precisely so; and it conveyed me from Nice to Genoa, from Genoa to
Turin, from Turin to Chambéry, from Chambéry to Pont-de-Beauvoisin, and
from Pont-de-Beauvoisin to Paris."

"Indeed? Then your father ought to have met with you on the road, for it
is exactly the same route which he himself took, and that is how we have
been able to trace your journey to this place."


"But," said Andrea, "if my father had met me, I doubt if he would have
recognized me; I must be somewhat altered since he last saw me."

"Oh, the voice of nature," said Monte Cristo.

"True," interrupted the young man, "I had not looked upon it in that
light."

"Now," replied Monte Cristo "there is only one source of uneasiness left
in your father's mind, which is this--he is anxious to know how you have
been employed during your long absence from him, how you have been
treated by your persecutors, and if they have conducted themselves
towards you with all the deference due to your rank. Finally, he is
anxious to see if you have been fortunate enough to escape the bad moral
influence to which you have been exposed, and which is infinitely more
to be dreaded than any physical suffering; he wishes to discover if the
fine abilities with which nature had endowed you have been weakened by
want of culture; and, in short, whether you consider yourself capable of
resuming and retaining in the world the high position to which your rank
entitles you."

"Sir!" exclaimed the young man, quite astounded, "I hope no false
report----"

"As for myself, I first heard you spoken of by my friend Wilmore, the
philanthropist. I believe he found you in some unpleasant position, but
do not know of what nature, for I did not ask, not being inquisitive.
Your misfortunes engaged his sympathies, so you see you must have been
interesting. He told me that he was anxious to restore you to the
position which you had lost, and that he would seek your father until he
found him. He did seek, and has found him, apparently, since he is here
now; and, finally, my friend apprised me of your coming, and gave me a
few other instructions relative to your future fortune. I am quite aware
that my friend Wilmore is peculiar, but he is sincere, and as rich as a
gold mine, consequently, he may indulge his eccentricities without any
fear of their ruining him, and I have promised to adhere to his
instructions. Now, sir, pray do not be offended at the question I am
about to put to you, as it comes in the way of my duty as your patron. I
would wish to know if the misfortunes which have happened to you--
misfortunes entirely beyond your control, and which in no degree
diminish my regard for you--I would wish to know if they have not, in
some measure, contributed to render you a stranger to the world in which
your fortune and your name entitle you to make a conspicuous figure?"

"Sir," returned the young man, with a reassurance of manner, "make your
mind easy on this score. Those who took me from my father, and who
always intended, sooner or later, to sell me again to my original
proprietor, as they have now done, calculated that, in order to make the
most of their bargain, it would be politic to leave me in possession of
all my personal and hereditary worth, and even to increase the value, if
possible. I have, therefore, received a very good education, and have
been treated by these kidnappers very much as the slaves were treated in
Asia Minor, whose masters made them grammarians, doctors, and
