"Then I shall believe God has forgiven you, and I will forgive you too."

"As true as I am a Christian," stammered Caderousse, "you will make me
die of fright!"

"Now begone," said the count, pointing to the window.

Caderousse, scarcely yet relying on this promise, put his legs out of
the window and stood on the ladder. "Now go down," said the abbé,
folding his arms. Understanding he had nothing more to fear from him,
Caderousse began to go down. Then the count brought the taper to the
window, that it might be seen in the Champs-Élysées that a man was
getting out of the window while another held a light.

"What are you doing, reverend sir? Suppose a watchman should pass?" And
he blew out the light. He then descended, but it was only when he felt
his foot touch the ground that he was satisfied of his safety.

Monte Cristo returned to his bedroom, and, glancing rapidly from the
garden to the street, he saw first Caderousse, who after walking to the
end of the garden, fixed his ladder against the wall at a different part
from where he came in. The count then looking over into the street, saw
the man who appeared to be waiting run in the same direction, and place
himself against the angle of the wall where Caderousse would come over.
Caderousse climbed the ladder slowly, and looked over the coping to see
if the street was quiet. No one could be seen or heard. The clock of the
Invalides struck one. Then Caderousse sat astride the coping, and
drawing up his ladder passed it over the wall; then he began to descend,
or rather to slide down by the two stanchions, which he did with an ease
which proved how accustomed he was to the exercise. But, once started,
he could not stop. In vain did he see a man start from the shadow when
he was halfway down--in vain did he see an arm raised as he touched the
ground. Before he could defend himself that arm struck him so violently
in the back that he let go the ladder, crying, "Help!" A second blow
struck him almost immediately in the side, and he fell, calling, "Help,
murder!" Then, as he rolled on the ground, his adversary seized him by
the hair, and struck him a third blow in the chest. This time Caderousse
endeavored to call again, but he could only utter a groan, and he
shuddered as the blood flowed from his three wounds. The assassin,
finding that he no longer cried out, lifted his head up by the hair; his
eyes were closed, and the mouth was distorted. The murderer, supposing
him dead, let fall his head and disappeared. Then Caderousse, feeling
that he was leaving him, raised himself on his elbow, and with a dying
voice cried with great effort, "Murder! I am dying! Help, reverend sir,-
-help!"

This mournful appeal pierced the darkness. The door of the back-
staircase opened, then the side-gate of the garden, and Ali and his
master were on the spot with lights.



Chapter 83. The Hand of God

Caderousse continued to call piteously, "Help, reverend sir, help!"

"What is the matter?" asked Monte Cristo.

"Help," cried Caderousse; "I am murdered!"

"We are here;--take courage."

"Ah, it's all over! You are come too late--you are come to see me die.
What blows, what blood!" He fainted. Ali and his master conveyed the
wounded man into a room. Monte Cristo motioned to Ali to undress him,
and he then examined his dreadful wounds. "My God!" he exclaimed, "thy
vengeance is sometimes delayed, but only that it may fall the more
effectually." Ali looked at his master for further instructions. "Bring
here immediately the king's attorney, M. de Villefort, who lives in the
Faubourg Saint-Honoré. As you pass the lodge, wake the porter, and send
him for a surgeon." Ali obeyed, leaving the abbé alone with Caderousse,
who had not yet revived.

When the wretched man again opened his eyes, the count looked at him
with a mournful expression of pity, and his lips moved as if in prayer.
"A surgeon, reverend sir--a surgeon!" said Caderousse.

"I have sent for one," replied the abbé.

"I know he cannot save my life, but he may strengthen me to give my
evidence."

"Against whom?"

"Against my murderer."

"Did you recognize him?"

"Yes; it was Benedetto."

"The young Corsican?"

"Himself."

"Your comrade?"

"Yes. After giving me the plan of this house, doubtless hoping I should
kill the count and he thus become his heir, or that the count would kill
me and I should be out of his way, he waylaid me, and has murdered me."

"I have also sent for the procureur."

"He will not come in time; I feel my life fast ebbing."

"Wait a moment," said Monte Cristo. He left the room, and returned in
five minutes with a phial. The dying man's eyes were all the time
riveted on the door, through which he hoped succor would arrive.
"Hasten, reverend sir, hasten! I shall faint again!" Monte Cristo
approached, and dropped on his purple lips three or four drops of the
contents of the phial. Caderousse drew a deep breath. "Oh," said he,
"that is life to me; more, more!"

"Two drops more would kill you," replied the abbé.

"Oh, send for someone to whom I can denounce the wretch!"

"Shall I write your deposition? You can sign it."

"Yes, yes," said Caderousse; and his eyes glistened at the thought of
this posthumous revenge. Monte Cristo wrote:--

"I die, murdered by the Corsican Benedetto, my comrade in the galleys at
Toulouse, No. 59."

"Quick, quick!" said Caderousse, "or I shall be unable to sign it."

Monte Cristo gave the pen to Caderousse, who collected all his strength,
signed it, and fell back on his bed, saying: "You will relate all the
rest, reverend sir; you will say he calls himself Andrea Cavalcanti. He
lodges at the Hôtel des Princes. Oh, I am dying!" He again fainted. The
abbé made him smell the contents of the phial, and he again opened his
eyes. His desire for revenge had not forsaken him.

"Ah, you will tell all I have said, will you not, reverend sir?"

"Yes, and much more."

"What more will you say?"

"I will say he had doubtless given you the plan of this house, in the
hope the count would kill you. I will say, likewise, he had apprised the
count, by a note, of your intention, and, the count being absent, I read
the note and sat up to await you."

"And he will be guillotined, will be not?" said Caderousse. "Promise me
that, and I will die with that hope."

"I will say," continued the count, "that he followed and watched you the
whole time, and when he saw you leave the house, ran to the angle of the
wall to conceal himself."

"Did you see all that?"

"Remember my words: 'If you return home safely, I shall believe God has
forgiven you, and I will forgive you also.'"

"And you did not warn me!" cried Caderousse, raising himself on his
elbows. "You knew I should be killed on leaving this house, and did not
warn me!"


"No; for I saw God's justice placed in the hands of Benedetto, and
should have thought it sacrilege to oppose the designs of Providence."

"God's justice! Speak not of it, reverend sir. If God were just, you
know how many would be punished who now escape."

"Patience," said the abbé, in a tone which made the dying man shudder;
"have patience!" Caderousse looked at him with amazement. "Besides,"
said the abbé, "God is merciful to all, as he has been to you; he is
first a father, then a judge."

"Do you then believe in God?" said Caderousse.

"Had I been so unhappy as not to believe in him until now," said Monte
Cristo, "I must believe on seeing you." Caderousse raised his clenched
hands towards heaven.

"Listen," said the abbé, extending his hand over the wounded man, as if
to command him to believe; "this is what the God in whom, on your death-
bed, you refuse to believe, has done for you--he gave you health,
strength, regular employment, even friends--a life, in fact, which a man
might enjoy with a calm conscience. Instead of improving these gifts,
rarely granted so abundantly, this has been your course--you have given
yourself up to sloth and drunkenness, and in a fit of intoxication have
ruined your best friend."

"Help!" cried Caderousse; "I require a surgeon, not a priest; perhaps I
am not mortally wounded--I may not die; perhaps they can yet save my
life."

"Your wounds are so far mortal that, without the three drops I gave you,
you would now be dead. Listen, then."

"Ah," murmured Caderousse, "what a strange priest you are; you drive the
dying to despair, instead of consoling them."

"Listen," continued the abbé. "When you had betrayed your friend God
began not to strike, but to warn you. Poverty overtook you. You had
already passed half your life in coveting that which you might have
