absolutely necessary that the place you may select have a small harbor,
creek, or bay, into which my corvette can enter and remain at anchor.
She draws only fifteen feet. She must be kept in constant readiness to
sail immediately I think proper to give the signal. Make the requisite
inquiries for a place of this description, and when you have met with an
eligible spot, visit it, and if it possess the advantages desired,
purchase it at once in your own name. The corvette must now, I think, be
on her way to Fécamp, must she not?"


"Certainly, your excellency; I saw her put to sea the same evening we
quitted Marseilles."

"And the yacht."

"Was ordered to remain at Martigues."

"'Tis well. I wish you to write from time to time to the captains in
charge of the two vessels so as to keep them on the alert."

"And the steamboat?"

"She is at Châlons?"

"Yes."

"The same orders for her as for the two sailing vessels."

"Very good."

"When you have purchased the estate I desire, I want constant relays of
horses at ten leagues apart along the northern and southern road."

"Your excellency may depend upon me." The Count made a gesture of
satisfaction, descended the terrace steps, and sprang into his carriage,
which was whirled along swiftly to the banker's house. Danglars was
engaged at that moment, presiding over a railroad committee. But the
meeting was nearly concluded when the name of his visitor was announced.
As the count's title sounded on his ear he rose, and addressing his
colleagues, who were members of one or the other Chamber, he said,--
"Gentlemen, pardon me for leaving you so abruptly; but a most ridiculous
circumstance has occurred, which is this,--Thomson & French, the Roman
bankers, have sent to me a certain person calling himself the Count of
Monte Cristo, and have given him an unlimited credit with me. I confess
this is the drollest thing I have ever met with in the course of my
extensive foreign transactions, and you may readily suppose it has
greatly roused my curiosity. I took the trouble this morning to call on
the pretended count--if he were a real count he wouldn't be so rich.
But, would you believe it, 'He was not receiving.' So the master of
Monte Cristo gives himself airs befitting a great millionaire or a
capricious beauty. I made inquiries, and found that the house in the
Champs-Élysées is his own property, and certainly it was very decently
kept up. But," pursued Danglars with one of his sinister smiles, "an
order for unlimited credit calls for something like caution on the part
of the banker to whom that order is given. I am very anxious to see this
man. I suspect a hoax is intended, but the instigators of it little knew
whom they had to deal with. 'They laugh best who laugh last!'"

Having delivered himself of this pompous address, uttered with a degree
of energy that left the baron almost out of breath, he bowed to the
assembled party and withdrew to his drawing-room, whose sumptuous
furnishings of white and gold had caused a great sensation in the
Chaussée d'Antin. It was to this apartment he had desired his guest to
be shown, with the purpose of overwhelming him at the sight of so much
luxury. He found the count standing before some copies of Albano and
Fattore that had been passed off to the banker as originals; but which,
mere copies as they were, seemed to feel their degradation in being
brought into juxtaposition with the gaudy colors that covered the
ceiling. The count turned round as he heard the entrance of Danglars
into the room. With a slight inclination of the head, Danglars signed to
the count to be seated, pointing significantly to a gilded armchair,
covered with white satin embroidered with gold. The count sat down. "I
have the honor, I presume, of addressing M. de Monte Cristo."


The count bowed. "And I of speaking to Baron Danglars, chevalier of the
Legion of Honor, and member of the Chamber of Deputies?"

Monte Cristo repeated all the titles he had read on the baron's card.

Danglars felt the irony and compressed his lips. "You will, I trust,
excuse me, monsieur, for not calling you by your title when I first
addressed you," he said, "but you are aware that we are living under a
popular form of government, and that I am myself a representative of the
liberties of the people."

"So much so," replied Monte Cristo, "that while you call yourself baron
you are not willing to call anybody else count."

"Upon my word, monsieur," said Danglars with affected carelessness, "I
attach no sort of value to such empty distinctions; but the fact is, I
was made baron, and also chevalier of the Legion of Honor, in return for
services rendered, but----"

"But you have discarded your titles after the example set you by Messrs.
de Montmorency and Lafayette? That was a noble example to follow,
monsieur."

"Why," replied Danglars, "not entirely so; with the servants,--you
understand."

"I see; to your domestics you are 'my lord,' the journalists style you
'monsieur,' while your constituents call you 'citizen.' These are
distinctions very suitable under a constitutional government. I
understand perfectly." Again Danglars bit his lips; he saw that he was
no match for Monte Cristo in an argument of this sort, and he therefore
hastened to turn to subjects more congenial.

"Permit me to inform you, Count," said he, bowing, "that I have received
a letter of advice from Thomson & French, of Rome."

"I am glad to hear it, baron,--for I must claim the privilege of
addressing you after the manner of your servants. I have acquired the
bad habit of calling persons by their titles from living in a country
where barons are still barons by right of birth. But as regards the
letter of advice, I am charmed to find that it has reached you; that
will spare me the troublesome and disagreeable task of coming to you for
money myself. You have received a regular letter of advice?"

"Yes," said Danglars, "but I confess I didn't quite comprehend its
meaning."

"Indeed?"

"And for that reason I did myself the honor of calling upon you, in
order to beg for an explanation."

"Go on, monsieur. Here I am, ready to give you any explanation you
desire."

"Why," said Danglars, "in the letter--I believe I have it about me"--
here he felt in his breast-pocket--"yes, here it is. Well, this letter
gives the Count of Monte Cristo unlimited credit on our house."

"Well, baron, what is there difficult to understand about that?"

"Merely the term _unlimited_--nothing else, certainly."

"Is not that word known in France? The people who wrote are Anglo-
Germans, you know."

"Oh, as for the composition of the letter, there is nothing to be said;
but as regards the competency of the document, I certainly have doubts."

"Is it possible?" asked the count, assuming all air and tone of the
utmost simplicity and candor. "Is it possible that Thomson & French are
not looked upon as safe and solvent bankers? Pray tell me what you
think, baron, for I feel uneasy, I can assure you, having some
considerable property in their hands."

"Thomson & French are perfectly solvent," replied Danglars, with an
almost mocking smile: "but the word _unlimited_, in financial affairs,
is so extremely vague."

"Is, in fact, unlimited," said Monte Cristo.

"Precisely what I was about to say," cried Danglars. "Now what is vague
is doubtful; and it was a wise man who said, 'when in doubt, keep out.'"

"Meaning to say," rejoined Monte Cristo, "that however Thomson & French
may be inclined to commit acts of imprudence and folly, the Baron
Danglars is not disposed to follow their example."

"Not at all."

"Plainly enough; Messrs. Thomson & French set no bounds to their
engagements while those of M. Danglars have their limits; he is a wise
man, according to his own showing."

"Monsieur," replied the banker, drawing himself up with a haughty air,
"the extent of my resources has never yet been questioned."

"It seems, then, reserved for me," said Monte Cristo coldly, "to be the
first to do so."

"By what right, sir?"

"By right of the objections you have raised, and the explanations you
have demanded, which certainly must have some motive."

Once more Danglars bit his lips. It was the second time he had been
worsted, and this time on his own ground. His forced politeness sat
awkwardly upon him, and approached almost to impertinence. Monte Cristo
on the contrary, preserved a graceful suavity of demeanor, aided by a
certain degree of simplicity he could assume at pleasure, and thus
possessed the advantage.

"Well, sir," resumed Danglars, after a brief silence, "I will endeavor
to make myself understood, by requesting you to inform me for what sum
you propose to draw upon me?"

"Why, truly," replied Monte Cristo, determined not to lose an inch of
the ground he had gained, "my reason for desiring an 'unlimited' credit
was precisely because I did not know how much money I might need."

The banker thought the time had come for him to take the upper hand. So
throwing himself back in his armchair, he said, with an arrogant and
purse-proud air,--"Let me beg of you not to hesitate in naming your
wishes; you will then be convinced that the resources of the house of
Danglars, however limited, are still equal to meeting the largest
