
"Child!" replied the count.

"I mean, as I love. You see, I have been a soldier ever since I attained
manhood. I reached the age of twenty-nine without loving, for none of
the feelings I before then experienced merit the appellation of love.
Well, at twenty-nine I saw Valentine; for two years I have loved her,
for two years I have seen written in her heart, as in a book, all the
virtues of a daughter and wife. Count, to possess Valentine would have
been a happiness too infinite, too ecstatic, too complete, too divine
for this world, since it has been denied me; but without Valentine the
earth is desolate."

"I have told you to hope," said the count.

"Then have a care, I repeat, for you seek to persuade me, and if you
succeed I should lose my reason, for I should hope that I could again
behold Valentine." The count smiled. "My friend, my father," said Morrel
with excitement, "have a care, I again repeat, for the power you wield
over me alarms me. Weigh your words before you speak, for my eyes have
already become brighter, and my heart beats strongly; be cautious, or
you will make me believe in supernatural agencies. I must obey you,
though you bade me call forth the dead or walk upon the water."

"Hope, my friend," repeated the count.

"Ah," said Morrel, falling from the height of excitement to the abyss of
despair--"ah, you are playing with me, like those good, or rather
selfish mothers who soothe their children with honeyed words, because
their screams annoy them. No, my friend, I was wrong to caution you; do
not fear, I will bury my grief so deep in my heart, I will disguise it
so, that you shall not even care to sympathize with me. Adieu, my
friend, adieu!"

"On the contrary," said the count, "after this time you must live with
me--you must not leave me, and in a week we shall have left France
behind us."

"And you still bid me hope?"

"I tell you to hope, because I have a method of curing you."

"Count, you render me sadder than before, if it be possible. You think
the result of this blow has been to produce an ordinary grief, and you
would cure it by an ordinary remedy--change of scene." And Morrel
dropped his head with disdainful incredulity.

"What can I say more?" asked Monte Cristo. "I have confidence in the
remedy I propose, and only ask you to permit me to assure you of its
efficacy."

"Count, you prolong my agony."

"Then," said the count, "your feeble spirit will not even grant me the
trial I request? Come--do you know of what the Count of Monte Cristo is
capable? do you know that he holds terrestrial beings under his control?
nay, that he can almost work a miracle? Well, wait for the miracle I
hope to accomplish, or----"

"Or?" repeated Morrel.

"Or, take care, Morrel, lest I call you ungrateful."

"Have pity on me, count!"

"I feel so much pity towards you, Maximilian, that--listen to me
attentively--if I do not cure you in a month, to the day, to the very
hour, mark my words, Morrel, I will place loaded pistols before you, and
a cup of the deadliest Italian poison--a poison more sure and prompt
than that which has killed Valentine."

"Will you promise me?"

"Yes; for I am a man, and have suffered like yourself, and also
contemplated suicide; indeed, often since misfortune has left me I have
longed for the delights of an eternal sleep."

"But you are sure you will promise me this?" said Morrel, intoxicated.
"I not only promise, but swear it!" said Monte Cristo extending his
hand.

"In a month, then, on your honor, if I am not consoled, you will let me
take my life into my own hands, and whatever may happen you will not
call me ungrateful?"

"In a month, to the day, the very hour and the date are sacred,
Maximilian. I do not know whether you remember that this is the 5th of
September; it is ten years today since I saved your father's life, who
wished to die." Morrel seized the count's hand and kissed it; the count
allowed him to pay the homage he felt due to him. "In a month you will
find on the table, at which we shall be then sitting, good pistols and a
delicious draught; but, on the other hand, you must promise me not to
attempt your life before that time."

"Oh, I also swear it!"

Monte Cristo drew the young man towards him, and pressed him for some
time to his heart. "And now," he said, "after today, you will come and
live with me; you can occupy Haydée's apartment, and my daughter will at
least be replaced by my son."

"Haydée?" said Morrel, "what has become of her?"

"She departed last night."

"To leave you?"

"To wait for me. Hold yourself ready then to join me at the Champs-
Élysées, and lead me out of this house without anyone seeing my
departure." Maximilian hung his head, and obeyed with childlike
reverence.



Chapter 106. Dividing the Proceeds

The apartment on the second floor of the house in the Rue Saint-Germain-
des-Prés, where Albert de Morcerf had selected a home for his mother,
was let to a very mysterious person. This was a man whose face the
concierge himself had never seen, for in the winter his chin was buried
in one of the large red handkerchiefs worn by gentlemen's coachmen on a
cold night, and in the summer he made a point of always blowing his nose
just as he approached the door. Contrary to custom, this gentleman had
not been watched, for as the report ran that he was a person of high
rank, and one who would allow no impertinent interference, his
_incognito_ was strictly respected.

His visits were tolerably regular, though occasionally he appeared a
little before or after his time, but generally, both in summer and
winter, he took possession of his apartment about four o'clock, though
he never spent the night there. At half-past three in the winter the
fire was lighted by the discreet servant, who had the superintendence of
the little apartment, and in the summer ices were placed on the table at
the same hour. At four o'clock, as we have already stated, the
mysterious personage arrived. Twenty minutes afterwards a carriage
stopped at the house, a lady alighted in a black or dark blue dress, and
always thickly veiled; she passed like a shadow through the lodge, and
ran upstairs without a sound escaping under the touch of her light foot.
No one ever asked her where she was going. Her face, therefore, like
that of the gentleman, was perfectly unknown to the two concierges, who
were perhaps unequalled throughout the capital for discretion. We need
not say she stopped at the first floor. Then she tapped in a peculiar
manner at a door, which after being opened to admit her was again
fastened, and curiosity penetrated no farther. They used the same
precautions in leaving as in entering the house. The lady always left
first, and as soon as she had stepped into her carriage, it drove away,
sometimes towards the right hand, sometimes to the left; then about
twenty minutes afterwards the gentleman would also leave, buried in his
cravat or concealed by his handkerchief.

The day after Monte Cristo had called upon Danglars, the mysterious
lodger entered at ten o'clock in the morning instead of four in the
afternoon. Almost directly afterwards, without the usual interval of
time, a cab arrived, and the veiled lady ran hastily upstairs. The door
opened, but before it could be closed, the lady exclaimed: "Oh, Lucien--
oh, my friend!" The concierge therefore heard for the first time that
the lodger's name was Lucien; still, as he was the very perfection of a
door-keeper, he made up his mind not to tell his wife. "Well, what is
the matter, my dear?" asked the gentleman whose name the lady's
agitation revealed; "tell me what is the matter."

"Oh, Lucien, can I confide in you?"

"Of course, you know you can do so. But what can be the matter? Your
note of this morning has completely bewildered me. This precipitation--
this unusual appointment. Come, ease me of my anxiety, or else frighten
me at once."

"Lucien, a great event has happened!" said the lady, glancing
inquiringly at Lucien,--"M. Danglars left last night!"

"Left?--M. Danglars left? Where has he gone?"

"I do not know."

"What do you mean? Has he gone intending not to return?"

"Undoubtedly;--at ten o'clock at night his horses took him to the
barrier of Charenton; there a post-chaise was waiting for him--he
entered it with his valet de chambre, saying that he was going to
Fontainebleau."

"Then what did you mean----"

"Stay--he left a letter for me."

"A letter?"

"Yes; read it." And the baroness took from her pocket a letter which she
gave to Debray. Debray paused a moment before reading, as if trying to
guess its contents, or perhaps while making up his mind how to act,
whatever it might contain. No doubt his ideas were arranged in a few
minutes, for he began reading the letter which caused so much uneasiness
in the heart of the baroness, and which ran as follows:--

"Madame and most faithful wife."

Debray mechanically stopped and looked at the baroness, whose face
became covered with blushes. "Read," she said.

