boats, and brilliant sunshine disappeared; the heavens were hung with
black, and the gigantic structure of the Château d'If seemed like the
phantom of a mortal enemy. As they reached the shore, the count
instinctively shrunk to the extreme end of the boat, and the owner was
obliged to call out, in his sweetest tone of voice, "Sir, we are at the
landing."

Monte Cristo remembered that on that very spot, on the same rock, he had
been violently dragged by the guards, who forced him to ascend the slope
at the points of their bayonets. The journey had seemed very long to
Dantès, but Monte Cristo found it equally short. Each stroke of the oar
seemed to awaken a new throng of ideas, which sprang up with the flying
spray of the sea.


There had been no prisoners confined in the Château d'If since the
revolution of July; it was only inhabited by a guard, kept there for the
prevention of smuggling. A concierge waited at the door to exhibit to
visitors this monument of curiosity, once a scene of terror. The count
inquired whether any of the ancient jailers were still there; but they
had all been pensioned, or had passed on to some other employment. The
concierge who attended him had only been there since 1830. He visited
his own dungeon. He again beheld the dull light vainly endeavoring to
penetrate the narrow opening. His eyes rested upon the spot where had
stood his bed, since then removed, and behind the bed the new stones
indicated where the breach made by the Abbé Faria had been. Monte Cristo
felt his limbs tremble; he seated himself upon a log of wood.

"Are there any stories connected with this prison besides the one
relating to the poisoning of Mirabeau?" asked the count; "are there any
traditions respecting these dismal abodes,--in which it is difficult to
believe men can ever have imprisoned their fellow-creatures?"

"Yes, sir; indeed, the jailer Antoine told me one connected with this
very dungeon."

Monte Cristo shuddered; Antoine had been his jailer. He had almost
forgotten his name and face, but at the mention of the name he recalled
his person as he used to see it, the face encircled by a beard, wearing
the brown jacket, the bunch of keys, the jingling of which he still
seemed to hear. The count turned around, and fancied he saw him in the
corridor, rendered still darker by the torch carried by the concierge.
"Would you like to hear the story, sir?"

"Yes; relate it," said Monte Cristo, pressing his hand to his heart to
still its violent beatings; he felt afraid of hearing his own history.

"This dungeon," said the concierge, "was, it appears, some time ago
occupied by a very dangerous prisoner, the more so since he was full of
industry. Another person was confined in the Château at the same time,
but he was not wicked, he was only a poor mad priest."


"Ah, indeed?--mad!" repeated Monte Cristo; "and what was his mania?"

"He offered millions to anyone who would set him at liberty."

Monte Cristo raised his eyes, but he could not see the heavens; there
was a stone veil between him and the firmament. He thought that there
had been no less thick a veil before the eyes of those to whom Faria
offered the treasures.

"Could the prisoners see each other?" he asked.

"Oh, no, sir, it was expressly forbidden; but they eluded the vigilance
of the guards, and made a passage from one dungeon to the other."

"And which of them made this passage?"

"Oh, it must have been the young man, certainly, for he was strong and
industrious, while the abbé was aged and weak; besides, his mind was too
vacillating to allow him to carry out an idea."

"Blind fools!" murmured the count.

"However, be that as it may, the young man made a tunnel, how or by what
means no one knows; but he made it, and there is the evidence yet
remaining of his work. Do you see it?" and the man held the torch to the
wall.

"Ah, yes; I see," said the count, in a voice hoarse from emotion.

"The result was that the two men communicated with one another; how long
they did so, nobody knows. One day the old man fell ill and died. Now
guess what the young one did?"

"Tell me."

"He carried off the corpse, which he placed in his own bed with its face
to the wall; then he entered the empty dungeon, closed the entrance, and
slipped into the sack which had contained the dead body. Did you ever
hear of such an idea?" Monte Cristo closed his eyes, and seemed again to
experience all the sensations he had felt when the coarse canvas, yet
moist with the cold dews of death, had touched his face. The jailer
continued: "Now this was his project. He fancied that they buried the
dead at the Château d'If, and imagining they would not expend much labor
on the grave of a prisoner, he calculated on raising the earth with his
shoulders, but unfortunately their arrangements at the Château
frustrated his projects. They never buried the dead; they merely
attached a heavy cannon-ball to the feet, and then threw them into the
sea. This is what was done. The young man was thrown from the top of the
rock; the corpse was found on the bed next day, and the whole truth was
guessed, for the men who performed the office then mentioned what they
had not dared to speak of before, that at the moment the corpse was
thrown into the deep, they heard a shriek, which was almost immediately
stifled by the water in which it disappeared." The count breathed with
difficulty; the cold drops ran down his forehead, and his heart was full
of anguish.

"No," he muttered, "the doubt I felt was but the commencement of
forgetfulness; but here the wound reopens, and the heart again thirsts
for vengeance. And the prisoner," he continued aloud, "was he ever heard
of afterwards?"

"Oh, no; of course not. You can understand that one of two things must
have happened; he must either have fallen flat, in which case the blow,
from a height of ninety feet, must have killed him instantly, or he must
have fallen upright, and then the weight would have dragged him to the
bottom, where he remained--poor fellow!"

"Then you pity him?" said the count.

"_Ma foi_, yes; though he was in his own element."

"What do you mean?"

"The report was that he had been a naval officer, who had been confined
for plotting with the Bonapartists."

"Great is truth," muttered the count, "fire cannot burn, nor water drown
it! Thus the poor sailor lives in the recollection of those who narrate
his history; his terrible story is recited in the chimney-corner, and a
shudder is felt at the description of his transit through the air to be
swallowed by the deep." Then, the count added aloud, "Was his name ever
known?"

"Oh, yes; but only as No. 34."

"Oh, Villefort, Villefort," murmured the count, "this scene must often
have haunted thy sleepless hours!"

"Do you wish to see anything more, sir?" said the concierge.

"Yes, especially if you will show me the poor abbé's room."

"Ah--No. 27."

"Yes; No. 27." repeated the count, who seemed to hear the voice of the
abbé answering him in those very words through the wall when asked his
name.

"Come, sir."

"Wait," said Monte Cristo, "I wish to take one final glance around this
room."

"This is fortunate," said the guide; "I have forgotten the other key."

"Go and fetch it."

"I will leave you the torch, sir."

"No, take it away; I can see in the dark."

"Why, you are like No. 34. They said he was so accustomed to darkness
that he could see a pin in the darkest corner of his dungeon."

"He spent fourteen years to arrive at that," muttered the count.

The guide carried away the torch. The count had spoken correctly.
Scarcely had a few seconds elapsed, ere he saw everything as distinctly
as by daylight. Then he looked around him, and really recognized his
dungeon.

"Yes," he said, "there is the stone upon which I used to sit; there is
the impression made by my shoulders on the wall; there is the mark of my
blood made when one day I dashed my head against the wall. Oh, those
figures, how well I remember them! I made them one day to calculate the
age of my father, that I might know whether I should find him still
living, and that of Mercédès, to know if I should find her still free.
After finishing that calculation, I had a minute's hope. I did not
reckon upon hunger and infidelity!" and a bitter laugh escaped the
count.

He saw in fancy the burial of his father, and the marriage of Mercédès.
On the other side of the dungeon he perceived an inscription, the white
letters of which were still visible on the green wall:

"'_O God!'_" he read, "_'preserve my memory!_'"

"Oh, yes," he cried, "that was my only prayer at last; I no longer
begged for liberty, but memory; I dreaded to become mad and forgetful. O
God, thou hast preserved my memory; I thank thee, I thank thee!" At this
moment the light of the torch was reflected on the wall; the guide was
coming; Monte Cristo went to meet him.

"Follow me, sir;" and without ascending the stairs the guide conducted
him by a subterraneous passage to another entrance. There, again, Monte
Cristo was assailed by a multitude of thoughts. The first thing that met
his eye was the meridian, drawn by the abbé on the wall, by which he
