found a house of mourning, the consequences of a scene so horrible that
the neighbors remember and speak of it to this day. Acting by my advice,
my poor sister had refused to comply with the unreasonable demands of
Benedetto, who was continually tormenting her for money, as long as he
believed there was a sou left in her possession. One morning he
threatened her with the severest consequences if she did not supply him
with what he desired, and disappeared and remained away all day, leaving
the kind-hearted Assunta, who loved him as if he were her own child, to
weep over his conduct and bewail his absence. Evening came, and still,
with all the patient solicitude of a mother, she watched for his return.

"As the eleventh hour struck, he entered with a swaggering air, attended
by two of the most dissolute and reckless of his boon companions. She
stretched out her arms to him, but they seized hold of her, and one of
the three--none other than the accursed Benedetto exclaimed,--'Put her
to torture and she'll soon tell us where her money is.'

"It unfortunately happened that our neighbor, Wasilio, was at Bastia,
leaving no person in his house but his wife; no human creature beside
could hear or see anything that took place within our dwelling. Two held
poor Assunta, who, unable to conceive that any harm was intended to her,
smiled in the face of those who were soon to become her executioners.
The third proceeded to barricade the doors and windows, then returned,
and the three united in stifling the cries of terror incited by the
sight of these preparations, and then dragged Assunta feet foremost
towards the brazier, expecting to wring from her an avowal of where her
supposed treasure was secreted. In the struggle her clothes caught fire,
and they were obliged to let go their hold in order to preserve
themselves from sharing the same fate. Covered with flames, Assunta
rushed wildly to the door, but it was fastened; she flew to the windows,
but they were also secured; then the neighbors heard frightful shrieks;
it was Assunta calling for help. The cries died away in groans, and next
morning, as soon as Wasilio's wife could muster up courage to venture
abroad, she caused the door of our dwelling to be opened by the public
authorities, when Assunta, although dreadfully burnt, was found still
breathing; every drawer and closet in the house had been forced open,
and the money stolen. Benedetto never again appeared at Rogliano,
neither have I since that day either seen or heard anything concerning
him.

"It was subsequently to these dreadful events that I waited on your
excellency, to whom it would have been folly to have mentioned
Benedetto, since all trace of him seemed entirely lost; or of my sister,
since she was dead."

"And in what light did you view the occurrence?" inquired Monte Cristo.

"As a punishment for the crime I had committed," answered Bertuccio.
"Oh, those Villeforts are an accursed race!"

"Truly they are," murmured the count in a lugubrious tone.

"And now," resumed Bertuccio, "your excellency may, perhaps, be able to
comprehend that this place, which I revisit for the first time--this
garden, the actual scene of my crime--must have given rise to
reflections of no very agreeable nature, and produced that gloom and
depression of spirits which excited the notice of your excellency, who
was pleased to express a desire to know the cause. At this instant a
shudder passes over me as I reflect that possibly I am now standing on
the very grave in which lies M. de Villefort, by whose hand the ground
was dug to receive the corpse of his child."

"Everything is possible," said Monte Cristo, rising from the bench on
which he had been sitting; "even," he added in an inaudible voice, "even
that the procureur be not dead. The Abbé Busoni did right to send you to
me," he went on in his ordinary tone, "and you have done well in
relating to me the whole of your history, as it will prevent my forming
any erroneous opinions concerning you in future. As for that Benedetto,
who so grossly belied his name, have you never made any effort to trace
out whither he has gone, or what has become of him?"

"No; far from wishing to learn whither he has betaken himself, I should
shun the possibility of meeting him as I would a wild beast. Thank God,
I have never heard his name mentioned by any person, and I hope and
believe he is dead."

"Do not think so, Bertuccio," replied the count; "for the wicked are not
so easily disposed of, for God seems to have them under his special
watch-care to make of them instruments of his vengeance."

"So be it," responded Bertuccio, "all I ask of heaven is that I may
never see him again. And now, your excellency," he added, bowing his
head, "you know everything--you are my judge on earth, as the Almighty
is in heaven; have you for me no words of consolation?"

"My good friend, I can only repeat the words addressed to you by the
Abbé Busoni. Villefort merited punishment for what he had done to you,
and, perhaps, to others. Benedetto, if still living, will become the
instrument of divine retribution in some way or other, and then be duly
punished in his turn. As far as you yourself are concerned, I see but
one point in which you are really guilty. Ask yourself, wherefore, after
rescuing the infant from its living grave, you did not restore it to its
mother? There was the crime, Bertuccio--that was where you became really
culpable."

"True, excellency, that was the crime, the real crime, for in that I
acted like a coward. My first duty, directly I had succeeded in
recalling the babe to life, was to restore it to its mother; but, in
order to do so, I must have made close and careful inquiry, which would,
in all probability, have led to my own apprehension; and I clung to
life, partly on my sister's account, and partly from that feeling of
pride inborn in our hearts of desiring to come off untouched and
victorious in the execution of our vengeance. Perhaps, too, the natural
and instinctive love of life made me wish to avoid endangering my own.
And then, again, I am not as brave and courageous as was my poor
brother." Bertuccio hid his face in his hands as he uttered these words,
while Monte Cristo fixed on him a look of inscrutable meaning. After a
brief silence, rendered still more solemn by the time and place, the
count said, in a tone of melancholy wholly unlike his usual manner, "In
order to bring this conversation to a fitting termination (the last we
shall ever hold upon this subject), I will repeat to you some words I
have heard from the lips of the Abbé Busoni. For all evils there are two
remedies--time and silence. And now leave me, Monsieur Bertuccio, to
walk alone here in the garden. The very circumstances which inflict on
you, as a principal in the tragic scene enacted here, such painful
emotions, are to me, on the contrary, a source of something like
contentment, and serve but to enhance the value of this dwelling in my
estimation. The chief beauty of trees consists in the deep shadow of
their umbrageous boughs, while fancy pictures a moving multitude of
shapes and forms flitting and passing beneath that shade. Here I have a
garden laid out in such a way as to afford the fullest scope for the
imagination, and furnished with thickly grown trees, beneath whose leafy
screen a visionary like myself may conjure up phantoms at will. This to
me, who expected but to find a blank enclosure surrounded by a straight
wall, is, I assure you, a most agreeable surprise. I have no fear of
ghosts, and I have never heard it said that so much harm had been done
by the dead during six thousand years as is wrought by the living in a
single day. Retire within, Bertuccio, and tranquillize your mind. Should
your confessor be less indulgent to you in your dying moments than you
found the Abbé Busoni, send for me, if I am still on earth, and I will
soothe your ears with words that shall effectually calm and soothe your
parting soul ere it goes forth to traverse the ocean called eternity."

Bertuccio bowed respectfully, and turned away, sighing heavily. Monte
Cristo, left alone, took three or four steps onwards, and murmured,
"Here, beneath this plane-tree, must have been where the infant's grave
was dug. There is the little door opening into the garden. At this
corner is the private staircase communicating with the sleeping
apartment. There will be no necessity for me to make a note of these
particulars, for there, before my eyes, beneath my feet, all around me,
I have the plan sketched with all the living reality of truth." After
making the tour of the garden a second time, the count re-entered his
carriage, while Bertuccio, who perceived the thoughtful expression of
his master's features, took his seat beside the driver without uttering
a word. The carriage proceeded rapidly towards Paris.

That same evening, upon reaching his abode in the Champs-Élysées, the
Count of Monte Cristo went over the whole building with the air of one
long acquainted with each nook or corner. Nor, although preceding the
party, did he once mistake one door for another, or commit the smallest
error when choosing any particular corridor or staircase to conduct him
to a place or suite of rooms he desired to visit. Ali was his principal
attendant during this nocturnal survey. Having given various orders to
Bertuccio relative to the improvements and alterations he desired to
make in the house, the Count, drawing out his watch, said to the
attentive Nubian, "It is half-past eleven o'clock; Haydée will soon be
here. Have the French attendants been summoned to await her coming?" Ali
extended his hands towards the apartments destined for the fair Greek,
which were so effectually concealed by means of a tapestried entrance,
that it would have puzzled the most curious to have divined their
existence. Ali, having pointed to the apartments, held up three fingers
of his right hand, and then, placing it beneath his head, shut his eyes,
and feigned to sleep. "I understand," said Monte Cristo, well acquainted
with Ali's pantomime; "you mean to tell me that three female attendants
await their new mistress in her sleeping-chamber." Ali, with
considerable animation, made a sign in the affirmative.

"Madame will be tired tonight," continued Monte Cristo, "and will, no
doubt, wish to rest. Desire the French attendants not to weary her with
questions, but merely to pay their respectful duty and retire. You will
also see that the Greek servants hold no communication with those of
this country." He bowed. Just at that moment voices were heard hailing
the concierge. The gate opened, a carriage rolled down the avenue, and
stopped at the steps. The count hastily descended, presented himself at
the already opened carriage door, and held out his hand to a young
woman, completely enveloped in a green silk mantle heavily embroidered
with gold. She raised the hand extended towards her to her lips, and
kissed it with a mixture of love and respect. Some few words passed
between them in that sonorous language in which Homer makes his gods
converse. The young woman spoke with an expression of deep tenderness,
while the count replied with an air of gentle gravity. Preceded by Ali,
who carried a rose-colored flambeau in his hand, the new-comer, who was
no other than the lovely Greek who had been Monte Cristo's companion in
Italy, was conducted to her apartments, while the count retired to the
pavilion reserved for himself. In another hour every light in the house
was extinguished, and it might have been thought that all its inmates
slept.



Chapter 46. Unlimited Credit

About two o'clock the following day a calash, drawn by a pair of
magnificent English horses, stopped at the door of Monte Cristo and a
person, dressed in a blue coat, with buttons of a similar color, a white
waistcoat, over which was displayed a massive gold chain, brown
trousers, and a quantity of black hair descending so low over his
eyebrows as to leave it doubtful whether it were not artificial so
little did its jetty glossiness assimilate with the deep wrinkles
stamped on his features--a person, in a word, who, although evidently
