is part of Valentine's marriage-portion, and M. de Saint-Méran wished to
sell it; for if it had remained another year or two uninhabited it would
have fallen to ruin." It was Morrel's turn to become pale.

"There was, above all, one room," continued Monte Cristo, "very plain in
appearance, hung with red damask, which, I know not why, appeared to me
quite dramatic."

"Why so?" said Danglars; "why dramatic?"

"Can we account for instinct?" said Monte Cristo. "Are there not some
places where we seem to breathe sadness?--why, we cannot tell. It is a
chain of recollections--an idea which carries you back to other times,
to other places--which, very likely, have no connection with the present
time and place. And there is something in this room which reminds me
forcibly of the chamber of the Marquise de Ganges [*] or Desdemona.
Stay, since we have finished dinner, I will show it to you, and then we
will take coffee in the garden. After dinner, the play." Monte Cristo
looked inquiringly at his guests. Madame de Villefort rose, Monte Cristo
did the same, and the rest followed their example. Villefort and Madame
Danglars remained for a moment, as if rooted to their seats; they
questioned each other with vague and stupid glances.

"Did you hear?" said Madame Danglars.


* Elisabeth de Rossan, Marquise de Ganges, was one of the famous women
of the court of Louis XIV. where she was known as "La Belle Provençale."
She was the widow of the Marquise de Castellane when she married de
Ganges, and having the misfortune to excite the enmity of her new
brothers-in-law, was forced by them to take poison; and they finished
her off with pistol and dagger.--Ed.

"We must go," replied Villefort, offering his arm. The others, attracted
by curiosity, were already scattered in different parts of the house;
for they thought the visit would not be limited to the one room, and
that, at the same time, they would obtain a view of the rest of the
building, of which Monte Cristo had created a palace. Each one went out
by the open doors. Monte Cristo waited for the two who remained; then,
when they had passed, he brought up the rear, and on his face was a
smile, which, if they could have understood it, would have alarmed them
much more than a visit to the room they were about to enter. They began
by walking through the apartments, many of which were fitted up in the
Eastern style, with cushions and divans instead of beds, and pipes
instead of furniture. The drawing-rooms were decorated with the rarest
pictures by the old masters, the boudoirs hung with draperies from
China, of fanciful colors, fantastic design, and wonderful texture. At
length they arrived at the famous room. There was nothing particular
about it, excepting that, although daylight had disappeared, it was not
lighted, and everything in it was old-fashioned, while the rest of the
rooms had been redecorated. These two causes were enough to give it a
gloomy aspect.

"Oh." cried Madame de Villefort, "it is really frightful."


Madame Danglars tried to utter a few words, but was not heard. Many
observations were made, the import of which was a unanimous opinion that
there was something sinister about the room.

"Is it not so?" asked Monte Cristo. "Look at that large clumsy bed, hung
with such gloomy, blood-colored drapery! And those two crayon portraits,
that have faded from the dampness; do they not seem to say, with their
pale lips and staring eyes, 'We have seen'?" Villefort became livid;
Madame Danglars fell into a long seat placed near the chimney. "Oh,"
said Madame de Villefort, smiling, "are you courageous enough to sit
down upon the very seat perhaps upon which the crime was committed?"
Madame Danglars rose suddenly.

"And then," said Monte Cristo, "this is not all."

"What is there more?" said Debray, who had not failed to notice the
agitation of Madame Danglars.

"Ah, what else is there?" said Danglars; "for, at present, I cannot say
that I have seen anything extraordinary. What do you say, M.
Cavalcanti?"

"Ah," said he, "we have at Pisa, Ugolino's tower; at Ferrara, Tasso's
prison; at Rimini, the room of Francesca and Paolo."

"Yes, but you have not this little staircase," said Monte Cristo,
opening a door concealed by the drapery. "Look at it, and tell me what
you think of it."

"What a wicked-looking, crooked staircase," said Château-Renaud with a
smile.

"I do not know whether the wine of Chios produces melancholy, but
certainly everything appears to me black in this house," said Debray.

Ever since Valentine's dowry had been mentioned, Morrel had been silent
and sad. "Can you imagine," said Monte Cristo, "some Othello or Abbé de
Ganges, one stormy, dark night, descending these stairs step by step,
carrying a load, which he wishes to hide from the sight of man, if not
from God?" Madame Danglars half fainted on the arm of Villefort, who was
obliged to support himself against the wall. "Ah, madame," cried Debray,
"what is the matter with you? how pale you look!"

"It is very evident what is the matter with her," said Madame de
Villefort; "M. de Monte Cristo is relating horrible stories to us,
doubtless intending to frighten us to death."

"Yes," said Villefort, "really, count, you frighten the ladies."

"What is the matter?" asked Debray, in a whisper, of Madame Danglars.

"Nothing," she replied with a violent effort. "I want air, that is all."

"Will you come into the garden?" said Debray, advancing towards the back
staircase.

"No, no," she answered, "I would rather remain here."

"Are you really frightened, madame?" said Monte Cristo.

"Oh, no, sir," said Madame Danglars; "but you suppose scenes in a manner
which gives them the appearance of reality."


"Ah, yes," said Monte Cristo smiling; "it is all a matter of
imagination. Why should we not imagine this the apartment of an honest
mother? And this bed with red hangings, a bed visited by the goddess
Lucina? And that mysterious staircase, the passage through which, not to
disturb their sleep, the doctor and nurse pass, or even the father
carrying the sleeping child?" Here Madame Danglars, instead of being
calmed by the soft picture, uttered a groan and fainted. "Madame
Danglars is ill," said Villefort; "it would be better to take her to her
carriage."

"Oh, _mon Dieu!_" said Monte Cristo, "and I have forgotten my smelling-
bottle!"

"I have mine," said Madame de Villefort; and she passed over to Monte
Cristo a bottle full of the same kind of red liquid whose good
properties the count had tested on Edward.

"Ah," said Monte Cristo, taking it from her hand.

"Yes," she said, "at your advice I have made the trial."

"And have you succeeded?"

"I think so."

Madame Danglars was carried into the adjoining room; Monte Cristo
dropped a very small portion of the red liquid upon her lips; she
returned to consciousness. "Ah," she cried, "what a frightful dream!"

Villefort pressed her hand to let her know it was not a dream. They
looked for M. Danglars, but, as he was not especially interested in
poetical ideas, he had gone into the garden, and was talking with Major
Cavalcanti on the projected railway from Leghorn to Florence. Monte
Cristo seemed in despair. He took the arm of Madame Danglars, and
conducted her into the garden, where they found Danglars taking coffee
between the Cavalcanti. "Really, madame," he said, "did I alarm you
much?"

"Oh, no, sir," she answered; "but you know, things impress us
differently, according to the mood of our minds." Villefort forced a
laugh. "And then, you know," he said, "an idea, a supposition, is
sufficient."

"Well," said Monte Cristo, "you may believe me if you like, but it is my
opinion that a crime has been committed in this house."

"Take care," said Madame de Villefort, "the king's attorney is here."

"Ah," replied Monte Cristo, "since that is the case, I will take
advantage of his presence to make my declaration."

"Your declaration?" said Villefort.

"Yes, before witnesses."

"Oh, this is very interesting," said Debray; "if there really has been a
crime, we will investigate it."

"There has been a crime," said Monte Cristo. "Come this way, gentlemen;
come, M. Villefort, for a declaration to be available, should be made
before the competent authorities." He then took Villefort's arm, and, at
the same time, holding that of Madame Danglars under his own, he dragged
the procureur to the plantain-tree, where the shade was thickest. All
the other guests followed. "Stay," said Monte Cristo, "here, in this
very spot" (and he stamped upon the ground), "I had the earth dug up and
fresh mould put in, to refresh these old trees; well, my man, digging,
found a box, or rather, the iron-work of a box, in the midst of which
was the skeleton of a newly born infant." Monte Cristo felt the arm of
Madame Danglars stiffen, while that of Villefort trembled. "A newly born
infant," repeated Debray; "this affair becomes serious!"


"Well," said Château-Renaud, "I was not wrong just now then, when I said
that houses had souls and faces like men, and that their exteriors
carried the impress of their characters. This house was gloomy because
it was remorseful: it was remorseful because it concealed a crime."

"Who said it was a crime?" asked Villefort, with a last effort.

"How? is it not a crime to bury a living child in a garden?" cried Monte
