crossing his legs motioned to the young man to take a seat also. Andrea
assumed his gayest manner. "You know, my dear count," said he, "the
ceremony is to take place this evening. At nine o'clock the contract is
to be signed at my father-in-law's."

"Ah, indeed?" said Monte Cristo.

"What; is it news to you? Has not M. Danglars informed you of the
ceremony?"

"Oh, yes," said the count; "I received a letter from him yesterday, but
I do not think the hour was mentioned."

"Possibly my father-in-law trusted to its general notoriety."

"Well," said Monte Cristo, "you are fortunate, M. Cavalcanti; it is a
most suitable alliance you are contracting, and Mademoiselle Danglars is
a handsome girl."

"Yes, indeed she is," replied Cavalcanti, in a very modest tone.

"Above all, she is very rich,--at least, I believe so," said Monte
Cristo.

"Very rich, do you think?" replied the young man.

"Doubtless; it is said M. Danglars conceals at least half of his
fortune."

"And he acknowledges fifteen or twenty millions," said Andrea with a
look sparkling with joy.

"Without reckoning," added Monte Cristo, "that he is on the eve of
entering into a sort of speculation already in vogue in the United
States and in England, but quite novel in France."

"Yes, yes, I know what you mean,--the railway, of which he has obtained
the grant, is it not?"

"Precisely; it is generally believed he will gain ten millions by that
affair."

"Ten millions! Do you think so? It is magnificent!" said Cavalcanti, who
was quite confounded at the metallic sound of these golden words.

"Without reckoning," replied Monte Cristo, "that all his fortune will
come to you, and justly too, since Mademoiselle Danglars is an only
daughter. Besides, your own fortune, as your father assured me, is
almost equal to that of your betrothed. But enough of money matters. Do
you know, M. Andrea, I think you have managed this affair rather
skilfully?"

"Not badly, by any means," said the young man; "I was born for a
diplomatist."

"Well, you must become a diplomatist; diplomacy, you know, is something
that is not to be acquired; it is instinctive. Have you lost your
heart?"

"Indeed, I fear it," replied Andrea, in the tone in which he had heard
Dorante or Valère reply to Alceste [*] at the Théâtre Français.

"Is your love returned?"


* In Molière's comedy, _Le Misanthrope_.

"I suppose so," said Andrea with a triumphant smile, "since I am
accepted. But I must not forget one grand point."

"Which?"

"That I have been singularly assisted."

"Nonsense."

"I have, indeed."

"By circumstances?"

"No; by you."

"By me? Not at all, prince," said Monte Cristo laying a marked stress on
the title, "what have I done for you? Are not your name, your social
position, and your merit sufficient?"

"No," said Andrea,--"no; it is useless for you to say so, count. I
maintain that the position of a man like you has done more than my name,
my social position, and my merit."

"You are completely mistaken, sir," said Monte Cristo coldly, who felt
the perfidious manœuvre of the young man, and understood the bearing of
his words; "you only acquired my protection after the influence and
fortune of your father had been ascertained; for, after all, who
procured for me, who had never seen either you or your illustrious
father, the pleasure of your acquaintance?--two of my good friends, Lord
Wilmore and the Abbé Busoni. What encouraged me not to become your
surety, but to patronize you?--your father's name, so well known in
Italy and so highly honored. Personally, I do not know you." This calm
tone and perfect ease made Andrea feel that he was, for the moment,
restrained by a more muscular hand than his own, and that the restraint
could not be easily broken through.

"Oh, then my father has really a very large fortune, count?"

"It appears so, sir," replied Monte Cristo.

"Do you know if the marriage settlement he promised me has come?"

"I have been advised of it."

"But the three millions?"

"The three millions are probably on the road."

"Then I shall really have them?"

"Oh, well," said the count, "I do not think you have yet known the want
of money." Andrea was so surprised that he pondered the matter for a
moment. Then, arousing from his reverie,--"Now, sir, I have one request
to make to you, which you will understand, even if it should be
disagreeable to you."

"Proceed," said Monte Cristo.

"I have formed an acquaintance, thanks to my good fortune, with many
noted persons, and have, at least for the moment, a crowd of friends.
But marrying, as I am about to do, before all Paris, I ought to be
supported by an illustrious name, and in the absence of the paternal
hand some powerful one ought to lead me to the altar; now, my father is
not coming to Paris, is he? He is old, covered with wounds, and suffers
dreadfully, he says, in travelling."

"Indeed?"

"Well, I am come to ask a favor of you."

"Of me?"

"Yes, of you."

"And pray what may it be?"

"Well, to take his part."

"Ah, my dear sir! What?--after the varied relations I have had the
happiness to sustain towards you, can it be that you know me so little
as to ask such a thing? Ask me to lend you half a million and, although
such a loan is somewhat rare, on my honor, you would annoy me less!
Know, then, what I thought I had already told you, that in participation
in this world's affairs, more especially in their moral aspects, the
Count of Monte Cristo has never ceased to entertain the scruples and
even the superstitions of the East. I, who have a seraglio at Cairo, one
at Smyrna, and one at Constantinople, preside at a wedding?--never!"

"Then you refuse me?"

"Decidedly; and were you my son or my brother I would refuse you in the
same way."

"But what must be done?" said Andrea, disappointed.

"You said just now that you had a hundred friends."

"Very true, but you introduced me at M. Danglars'."

"Not at all! Let us recall the exact facts. You met him at a dinner
party at my house, and you introduced yourself at his house; that is a
totally different affair."

"Yes, but, by my marriage, you have forwarded that."

"I?--not in the least, I beg you to believe. Recollect what I told you
when you asked me to propose you. 'Oh, I never make matches, my dear
prince, it is my settled principle.'" Andrea bit his lips.


"But, at least, you will be there?"

"Will all Paris be there?"

"Oh, certainly."

"Well, like all Paris, I shall be there too," said the count.

"And will you sign the contract?"

"I see no objection to that; my scruples do not go thus far."

"Well, since you will grant me no more, I must be content with what you
give me. But one word more, count."

"What is it?"

"Advice."

"Be careful; advice is worse than a service."

"Oh, you can give me this without compromising yourself."

