Cristo had made a lively impression on the minds of all the party
assembled at the breakfast given by Albert de Morcerf; and although
Debray was not in the habit of yielding to such feelings, he had never
been able to shake off the powerful influence excited in his mind by the
impressive look and manner of the count, consequently the description
given by Lucien to the baroness bore the highly-colored tinge of his own
heated imagination. Already excited by the wonderful stories related of
the count by De Morcerf, it is no wonder that Madame Danglars eagerly
listened to, and fully credited, all the additional circumstances
detailed by Debray. This posing at the piano and over the album was only
a little ruse adopted by way of precaution. A most gracious welcome and
unusual smile were bestowed on M. Danglars; the count, in return for his
gentlemanly bow, received a formal though graceful courtesy, while
Lucien exchanged with the count a sort of distant recognition, and with
Danglars a free and easy nod.

"Baroness," said Danglars, "give me leave to present to you the Count of
Monte Cristo, who has been most warmly recommended to me by my
correspondents at Rome. I need but mention one fact to make all the
ladies in Paris court his notice, and that is, that he has come to take
up his abode in Paris for a year, during which brief period he proposes
to spend six millions of money. That means balls, dinners, and lawn
parties without end, in all of which I trust the count will remember us,
as he may depend upon it we shall him, in our own humble
entertainments." In spite of the gross flattery and coarseness of this
address, Madame Danglars could not forbear gazing with considerable
interest on a man capable of expending six millions in twelve months,
and who had selected Paris for the scene of his princely extravagance.
"And when did you arrive here?" inquired she.

"Yesterday morning, madame."

"Coming, as usual, I presume, from the extreme end of the globe? Pardon
me--at least, such I have heard is your custom."

"Nay, madame. This time I have merely come from Cadiz."

"You have selected a most unfavorable moment for your first visit. Paris
is a horrible place in summer. Balls, parties, and _fêtes_ are over; the
Italian opera is in London; the French opera everywhere except in Paris.
As for the Théatre Français, you know, of course, that it is nowhere.
The only amusements left us are the indifferent races at the Champ-de-
Mars and Satory. Do you propose entering any horses at either of these
races, count?"

"I shall do whatever they do at Paris, madame, if I have the good
fortune to find someone who will initiate me into the prevalent ideas of
amusement."

"Are you fond of horses, count?"

"I have passed a considerable part of my life in the East, madame, and
you are doubtless aware that the Orientals value only two things--the
fine breeding of their horses and the beauty of their women."

"Nay, count," said the baroness, "it would have been somewhat more
gallant to have placed the ladies first."

"You see, madame, how rightly I spoke when I said I required a preceptor
to guide me in all my sayings and doings here." At this instant the
favorite attendant of Madame Danglars entered the boudoir; approaching
her mistress, she spoke some words in an undertone. Madame Danglars
turned very pale, then exclaimed,--"I cannot believe it; the thing is
impossible."

"I assure you, madame," replied the woman, "it is as I have said."
Turning impatiently towards her husband, Madame Danglars demanded, "Is
this true?"

"Is what true, madame?" inquired Danglars, visibly agitated.

"What my maid tells me."

"But what does she tell you?"

"That when my coachman was about to harness the horses to my carriage,
he discovered that they had been removed from the stables without his
knowledge. I desire to know what is the meaning of this?"

"Be kind enough, madame, to listen to me," said Danglars.

"Oh, yes; I will listen, monsieur, for I am most curious to hear what
explanation you will give. These two gentlemen shall decide between us;
but, first, I will state the case to them. Gentlemen," continued the
baroness, "among the ten horses in the stables of Baron Danglars, are
two that belong exclusively to me--a pair of the handsomest and most
spirited creatures to be found in Paris. But to you, at least, M.
Debray, I need not give a further description, because to you my
beautiful pair of dappled grays were well known. Well, I had promised
Madame de Villefort the loan of my carriage to drive tomorrow to the
Bois; but when my coachman goes to fetch the grays from the stables they
are gone--positively gone. No doubt M. Danglars has sacrificed them to
the selfish consideration of gaining some thousands of paltry francs.
Oh, what a detestable crew they are, these mercenary speculators!"

"Madame," replied Danglars, "the horses were not sufficiently quiet for
you; they were scarcely four years old, and they made me extremely
uneasy on your account."

"Nonsense," retorted the baroness; "you could not have entertained any
alarm on the subject, because you are perfectly well aware that I have
had for a month in my service the very best coachman in Paris. But,
perhaps, you have disposed of the coachman as well as the horses?"

"My dear love, pray do not say any more about them, and I promise you
another pair exactly like them in appearance, only more quiet and
steady." The baroness shrugged her shoulders with an air of ineffable
contempt, while her husband, affecting not to observe this unconjugal
gesture, turned towards Monte Cristo and said,--"Upon my word, count, I
am quite sorry not to have met you sooner. You are setting up an
establishment, of course?"

"Why, yes," replied the count.

"I should have liked to have made you the offer of these horses. I have
almost given them away, as it is; but, as I before said, I was anxious
to get rid of them upon any terms. They were only fit for a young man."

"I am much obliged by your kind intentions towards me," said Monte
Cristo; "but this morning I purchased a very excellent pair of carriage-
horses, and I do not think they were dear. There they are. Come, M.
Debray, you are a connoisseur, I believe, let me have your opinion upon
them." As Debray walked towards the window, Danglars approached his
wife. "I could not tell you before others," said he in a low tone, "the
reason of my parting with the horses; but a most enormous price was
offered me this morning for them. Some madman or fool, bent upon ruining
himself as fast as he can, actually sent his steward to me to purchase
them at any cost; and the fact is, I have gained 16,000 francs by the
sale of them. Come, don't look so angry, and you shall have 4,000 francs
of the money to do what you like with, and Eugénie shall have 2,000.
There, what do you think now of the affair? Wasn't I right to part with
the horses?" Madame Danglars surveyed her husband with a look of
withering contempt.

"Great heavens?" suddenly exclaimed Debray.

"What is it?" asked the baroness.

"I cannot be mistaken; there are your horses! The very animals we were
speaking of, harnessed to the count's carriage!"

"My dappled grays?" demanded the baroness, springing to the window.
"'Tis indeed they!" said she. Danglars looked absolutely stupefied. "How
very singular," cried Monte Cristo with well-feigned astonishment.

"I cannot believe it," murmured the banker. Madame Danglars whispered a
few words in the ear of Debray, who approached Monte Cristo, saying,
"The baroness wishes to know what you paid her husband for the horses."

"I scarcely know," replied the count; "it was a little surprise prepared
for me by my steward, and cost me--well, somewhere about 30,000 francs."
Debray conveyed the count's reply to the baroness. Poor Danglars looked
so crest-fallen and discomfited that Monte Cristo assumed a pitying air
towards him. "See," said the count, "how very ungrateful women are. Your
kind attention, in providing for the safety of the baroness by disposing
of the horses, does not seem to have made the least impression on her.
But so it is; a woman will often, from mere wilfulness, prefer that
which is dangerous to that which is safe. Therefore, in my opinion, my
dear baron, the best and easiest way is to leave them to their fancies,
and allow them to act as they please, and then, if any mischief follows,
why, at least, they have no one to blame but themselves." Danglars made
no reply; he was occupied in anticipations of the coming scene between
himself and the baroness, whose frowning brow, like that of Olympic
Jove, predicted a storm. Debray, who perceived the gathering clouds, and
felt no desire to witness the explosion of Madame Danglars' rage,
suddenly recollected an appointment, which compelled him to take his
leave; while Monte Cristo, unwilling by prolonging his stay to destroy
the advantages he hoped to obtain, made a farewell bow and departed,
leaving Danglars to endure the angry reproaches of his wife.


"Excellent," murmured Monte Cristo to himself, as he came away. "All has
gone according to my wishes. The domestic peace of this family is
henceforth in my hands. Now, then, to play another master-stroke, by
which I shall gain the heart of both husband and wife--delightful!
Still," added he, "amid all this, I have not yet been presented to
Mademoiselle Eugénie Danglars, whose acquaintance I should have been
glad to make. But," he went on with his peculiar smile, "I am here in
Paris, and have plenty of time before me--by and by will do for that."
With these reflections he entered his carriage and returned home. Two
hours afterwards, Madame Danglars received a most flattering epistle
from the count, in which he entreated her to receive back her favorite
"dappled grays," protesting that he could not endure the idea of making
his entry into the Parisian world of fashion with the knowledge that his
splendid equipage had been obtained at the price of a lovely woman's
regrets. The horses were sent back wearing the same harness she had seen
on them in the morning; only, by the count's orders, in the centre of
each rosette that adorned either side of their heads, had been fastened
a large diamond.

To Danglars Monte Cristo also wrote, requesting him to excuse the
whimsical gift of a capricious millionaire, and to beg the baroness to
pardon the Eastern fashion adopted in the return of the horses.

During the evening, Monte Cristo quitted Paris for Auteuil, accompanied
by Ali. The following day, about three o'clock, a single blow struck on
the gong summoned Ali to the presence of the count. "Ali," observed his
master, as the Nubian entered the chamber, "you have frequently
explained to me how more than commonly skilful you are in throwing the
lasso, have you not?" Ali drew himself up proudly, and then returned a
