course to do a poor devil a service."


"But such services as these might involve him with the authorities of
the country in which he practices this kind of philanthropy," said
Franz.

"And what cares he for that," replied Gaetano with a laugh, "or any
authorities? He smiles at them. Let them try to pursue him! Why, in the
first place, his yacht is not a ship, but a bird, and he would beat any
frigate three knots in every nine; and if he were to throw himself on
the coast, why, is he not certain of finding friends everywhere?"

It was perfectly clear that the Signor Sinbad, Franz's host, had the
honor of being on excellent terms with the smugglers and bandits along
the whole coast of the Mediterranean, and so enjoyed exceptional
privileges. As to Franz, he had no longer any inducement to remain at
Monte Cristo. He had lost all hope of detecting the secret of the
grotto; he consequently despatched his breakfast, and, his boat being
ready, he hastened on board, and they were soon under way. At the moment
the boat began her course they lost sight of the yacht, as it
disappeared in the gulf of Porto-Vecchio. With it was effaced the last
trace of the preceding night; and then supper, Sinbad, hashish,
statues,--all became a dream for Franz. The boat sailed on all day and
all night, and next morning, when the sun rose, they had lost sight of
Monte Cristo. When Franz had once again set foot on shore, he forgot,
for the moment at least, the events which had just passed, while he
finished his affairs of pleasure at Florence, and then thought of
nothing but how he should rejoin his companion, who was awaiting him at
Rome.

He set out, and on the Saturday evening reached the Place de la Douane
by the mail-coach. An apartment, as we have said, had been retained
beforehand, and thus he had but to go to Signor Pastrini's hotel. But
this was not so easy a matter, for the streets were thronged with
people, and Rome was already a prey to that low and feverish murmur
which precedes all great events; and at Rome there are four great events
in every year,--the Carnival, Holy Week, Corpus Christi, and the Feast
of St. Peter. All the rest of the year the city is in that state of dull
apathy, between life and death, which renders it similar to a kind of
station between this world and the next--a sublime spot, a resting-place
full of poetry and character, and at which Franz had already halted five
or six times, and at each time found it more marvellous and striking.

At last he made his way through the mob, which was continually
increasing and getting more and more turbulent, and reached the hotel.
On his first inquiry he was told, with the impertinence peculiar to
hired hackney-coachmen and innkeepers with their houses full, that there
was no room for him at the Hôtel de Londres. Then he sent his card to
Signor Pastrini, and asked for Albert de Morcerf. This plan succeeded;
and Signor Pastrini himself ran to him, excusing himself for having made
his excellency wait, scolding the waiters, taking the candlestick from
the porter, who was ready to pounce on the traveller and was about to
lead him to Albert, when Morcerf himself appeared.

The apartment consisted of two small rooms and a parlor. The two rooms
looked onto the street--a fact which Signor Pastrini commented upon as
an inappreciable advantage. The rest of the floor was hired by a very
rich gentleman who was supposed to be a Sicilian or Maltese; but the
host was unable to decide to which of the two nations the traveller
belonged. "Very good, signor Pastrini," said Franz; "but we must have
some supper instantly, and a carriage for tomorrow and the following
days."

"As to supper," replied the landlord, "you shall be served immediately;
but as for the carriage----"

"What as to the carriage?" exclaimed Albert. "Come, come, Signor
Pastrini, no joking; we must have a carriage."

"Sir," replied the host, "we will do all in our power to procure you
one--this is all I can say."

"And when shall we know?" inquired Franz.

"Tomorrow morning," answered the innkeeper.

"Oh, the deuce! then we shall pay the more, that's all, I see plainly
enough. At Drake's or Aaron's one pays twenty-five lire for common days,
and thirty or thirty-five lire a day more for Sundays and feast days;
add five lire a day more for extras, that will make forty, and there's
an end of it."

"I am afraid if we offer them double that we shall not procure a
carriage."

"Then they must put horses to mine. It is a little worse for the
journey, but that's no matter."

"There are no horses." Albert looked at Franz like a man who hears a
reply he does not understand.

"Do you understand that, my dear Franz--no horses?" he said, "but can't
we have post-horses?"

"They have been all hired this fortnight, and there are none left but
those absolutely requisite for posting."

"What are we to say to this?" asked Franz.

"I say, that when a thing completely surpasses my comprehension, I am
accustomed not to dwell on that thing, but to pass to another. Is supper
ready, Signor Pastrini?"

"Yes, your excellency."

"Well, then, let us sup."

"But the carriage and horses?" said Franz.

"Be easy, my dear boy; they will come in due season; it is only a
question of how much shall be charged for them." Morcerf then, with that
delighted philosophy which believes that nothing is impossible to a full
purse or well-lined pocketbook, supped, went to bed, slept soundly, and
dreamed he was racing all over Rome at Carnival time in a coach with six
horses.



Chapter 33. Roman Bandits

The next morning Franz woke first, and instantly rang the bell. The
sound had not yet died away when Signor Pastrini himself entered.

"Well, excellency," said the landlord triumphantly, and without waiting
for Franz to question him, "I feared yesterday, when I would not promise
you anything, that you were too late--there is not a single carriage to
be had--that is, for the last three days of the carnival."

"Yes," returned Franz, "for the very three days it is most needed."

"What is the matter?" said Albert, entering; "no carriage to be had?"

"Just so," returned Franz, "you have guessed it."

"Well, your Eternal City is a nice sort of place."

"That is to say, excellency," replied Pastrini, who was desirous of
keeping up the dignity of the capital of the Christian world in the eyes
of his guest, "that there are no carriages to be had from Sunday to
Tuesday evening, but from now till Sunday you can have fifty if you
please."

"Ah, that is something," said Albert; "today is Thursday, and who knows
what may arrive between this and Sunday?"

"Ten or twelve thousand travellers will arrive," replied Franz, "which
will make it still more difficult."

"My friend," said Morcerf, "let us enjoy the present without gloomy
forebodings for the future."

"At least we can have a window?"

"Where?"

"In the Corso."

"Ah, a window!" exclaimed Signor Pastrini,--"utterly impossible; there
was only one left on the fifth floor of the Doria Palace, and that has
been let to a Russian prince for twenty sequins a day."

The two young men looked at each other with an air of stupefaction.

"Well," said Franz to Albert, "do you know what is the best thing we can
do? It is to pass the Carnival at Venice; there we are sure of obtaining
gondolas if we cannot have carriages."

"Ah, the devil, no," cried Albert; "I came to Rome to see the Carnival,
and I will, though I see it on stilts."

"Bravo! an excellent idea. We will disguise ourselves as monster
pulchinellos or shepherds of the Landes, and we shall have complete
success."

"Do your excellencies still wish for a carriage from now to Sunday
morning?"

"_Parbleu!_" said Albert, "do you think we are going to run about on
foot in the streets of Rome, like lawyers' clerks?"

"I hasten to comply with your excellencies' wishes; only, I tell you
beforehand, the carriage will cost you six piastres a day."

"And, as I am not a millionaire, like the gentleman in the next
apartments," said Franz, "I warn you, that as I have been four times
before at Rome, I know the prices of all the carriages; we will give you
twelve piastres for today, tomorrow, and the day after, and then you
will make a good profit."

"But, excellency"--said Pastrini, still striving to gain his point.

"Now go," returned Franz, "or I shall go myself and bargain with your
_affettatore_, who is mine also; he is an old friend of mine, who has
plundered me pretty well already, and, in the hope of making more out of
me, he will take a less price than the one I offer you; you will lose
the preference, and that will be your fault."

"Do not give yourselves the trouble, excellency," returned Signor
Pastrini, with the smile peculiar to the Italian speculator when he
