"Yes; do you not know that this is a young man whom the count is
introducing?" said Morcerf.

"Let us not misunderstand each other," replied Monte Cristo; "I
introduce no one, and certainly not M. Cavalcanti."

"And who," said Albert with a forced smile, "is to marry Mademoiselle
Danglars instead of me, which grieves me cruelly."

"What? Cavalcanti is going to marry Mademoiselle Danglars?" asked
Beauchamp.

"Certainly; do you come from the end of the world?" said Monte Cristo;
"you, a journalist, the husband of renown? It is the talk of all Paris."

"And you, count, have made this match?" asked Beauchamp.

"I? Silence, purveyor of gossip, do not spread that report. I make a
match? No, you do not know me; I have done all in my power to oppose
it."

"Ah, I understand," said Beauchamp, "on our friend Albert's account."

"On my account?" said the young man; "oh, no, indeed, the count will do
me the justice to assert that I have, on the contrary, always entreated
him to break off my engagement, and happily it is ended. The count
pretends I have not him to thank;--so be it--I will erect an altar _Deo
ignoto_."

"Listen," said Monte Cristo; "I have had little to do with it, for I am
at variance both with the father-in-law and the young man; there is only
Mademoiselle Eugénie, who appears but little charmed with the thoughts
of matrimony, and who, seeing how little I was disposed to persuade her
to renounce her dear liberty, retains any affection for me."

"And do you say this wedding is at hand?"

"Oh, yes, in spite of all I could say. I do not know the young man; he
is said to be of good family and rich, but I never trust to vague
assertions. I have warned M. Danglars of it till I am tired, but he is
fascinated with his Luccanese. I have even informed him of a
circumstance I consider very serious; the young man was either charmed
by his nurse, stolen by gypsies, or lost by his tutor, I scarcely know
which. But I do know his father lost sight of him for more than ten
years; what he did during these ten years, God only knows. Well, all
that was useless. They have commissioned me to write to the major to
demand papers, and here they are. I send them, but like Pilate--washing
my hands."

"And what does Mademoiselle d'Armilly say to you for robbing her of her
pupil?"

"Oh, well, I don't know; but I understand that she is going to Italy.
Madame Danglars asked me for letters of recommendation for the
_impresari_; I gave her a few lines for the director of the Valle
Theatre, who is under some obligation to me. But what is the matter,
Albert? you look dull; are you, after all, unconsciously in love with
Mademoiselle Eugénie?"

"I am not aware of it," said Albert, smiling sorrowfully. Beauchamp
turned to look at some paintings. "But," continued Monte Cristo, "you
are not in your usual spirits?"

"I have a dreadful headache," said Albert.

"Well, my dear viscount," said Monte Cristo, "I have an infallible
remedy to propose to you."

"What is that?" asked the young man.

"A change."

"Indeed?" said Albert.

"Yes; and as I am just now excessively annoyed, I shall go from home.
Shall we go together?"

"You annoyed, count?" said Beauchamp; "and by what?"

"Ah, you think very lightly of it; I should like to see you with a brief
preparing in your house."

"What brief?"

"The one M. de Villefort is preparing against my amiable assassin--some
brigand escaped from the gallows apparently."

"True," said Beauchamp; "I saw it in the paper. Who is this Caderousse?"

"Some Provençal, it appears. M. de Villefort heard of him at Marseilles,
and M. Danglars recollects having seen him. Consequently, the procureur
is very active in the affair, and the prefect of police very much
interested; and, thanks to that interest, for which I am very grateful,
they send me all the robbers of Paris and the neighborhood, under
pretence of their being Caderousse's murderers, so that in three months,
if this continues, every robber and assassin in France will have the
plan of my house at his fingers' ends. I am resolved to desert them and
go to some remote corner of the earth, and shall be happy if you will
accompany me, viscount."

"Willingly."

"Then it is settled?"

"Yes, but where?"

"I have told you, where the air is pure, where every sound soothes,
where one is sure to be humbled, however proud may be his nature. I love
that humiliation, I, who am master of the universe, as was Augustus."

"But where are you really going?"

"To sea, viscount; you know I am a sailor. I was rocked when an infant
in the arms of old Ocean, and on the bosom of the beautiful Amphitrite;
I have sported with the green mantle of the one and the azure robe of
the other; I love the sea as a mistress, and pine if I do not often see
her."

"Let us go, count."

"To sea?"

"Yes."

"You accept my proposal?"

"I do."

"Well, Viscount, there will be in my courtyard this evening a good
travelling britzka, with four post-horses, in which one may rest as in a
bed. M. Beauchamp, it holds four very well, will you accompany us?"

"Thank you, I have just returned from sea."

"What? you have been to sea?"

"Yes; I have just made a little excursion to the Borromean Islands." [*]


* Lake Maggiore.

"What of that? come with us," said Albert.

"No, dear Morcerf; you know I only refuse when the thing is impossible.
Besides, it is important," added he in a low tone, "that I should remain
in Paris just now to watch the paper."

"Ah, you are a good and an excellent friend," said Albert; "yes, you are
right; watch, watch, Beauchamp, and try to discover the enemy who made
this disclosure." Albert and Beauchamp parted, the last pressure of
their hands expressing what their tongues could not before a stranger.

"Beauchamp is a worthy fellow," said Monte Cristo, when the journalist
was gone; "is he not, Albert?"

"Yes, and a sincere friend; I love him devotedly. But now we are alone,-
-although it is immaterial to me,--where are we going?"

"Into Normandy, if you like."

"Delightful; shall we be quite retired? have no society, no neighbors?"

"Our companions will be riding-horses, dogs to hunt with, and a fishing-
boat."

"Exactly what I wish for; I will apprise my mother of my intention, and
return to you."

"But shall you be allowed to go into Normandy?"

"I may go where I please."

"Yes, I am aware you may go alone, since I once met you in Italy--but to
accompany the mysterious Monte Cristo?"

"You forget, count, that I have often told you of the deep interest my
mother takes in you."

"'Woman is fickle.' said Francis I.; 'woman is like a wave of the sea,'
said Shakespeare; both the great king and the great poet ought to have
known woman's nature well."

"Woman's, yes; my mother is not woman, but _a_ woman."

"As I am only a humble foreigner, you must pardon me if I do not
understand all the subtle refinements of your language."

"What I mean to say is, that my mother is not quick to give her
confidence, but when she does she never changes."

"Ah, yes, indeed," said Monte Cristo with a sigh; "and do you think she
is in the least interested in me?"

"I repeat it, you must really be a very strange and superior man, for my
mother is so absorbed by the interest you have excited, that when I am
with her she speaks of no one else."

"And does she try to make you dislike me?"

"On the contrary, she often says, 'Morcerf, I believe the count has a
