tottering house.



Chapter 95. Father and Daughter

We saw in a preceding chapter how Madame Danglars went formally to
announce to Madame de Villefort the approaching marriage of Eugénie
Danglars and M. Andrea Cavalcanti. This formal announcement, which
implied or appeared to imply, the approval of all the persons concerned
in this momentous affair, had been preceded by a scene to which our
readers must be admitted. We beg them to take one step backward, and to
transport themselves, the morning of that day of great catastrophes,
into the showy, gilded salon we have before shown them, and which was
the pride of its owner, Baron Danglars. In this room, at about ten
o'clock in the morning, the banker himself had been walking to and fro
for some minutes thoughtfully and in evident uneasiness, watching both
doors, and listening to every sound. When his patience was exhausted, he
called his valet. "Étienne," said he, "see why Mademoiselle Eugénie has
asked me to meet her in the drawing-room, and why she makes me wait so
long."

Having given this vent to his ill-humor, the baron became more calm;
Mademoiselle Danglars had that morning requested an interview with her
father, and had fixed on the gilded drawing-room as the spot. The
singularity of this step, and above all its formality, had not a little
surprised the banker, who had immediately obeyed his daughter by
repairing first to the drawing-room. Étienne soon returned from his
errand. "Mademoiselle's lady's maid says, sir, that mademoiselle is
finishing her toilette, and will be here shortly."

Danglars nodded, to signify that he was satisfied. To the world and to
his servants Danglars assumed the character of the good-natured man and
the indulgent father. This was one of his parts in the popular comedy he
was performing,--a make-up he had adopted and which suited him about as
well as the masks worn on the classic stage by paternal actors, who seen
from one side, were the image of geniality, and from the other showed
lips drawn down in chronic ill-temper. Let us hasten to say that in
private the genial side descended to the level of the other, so that
generally the indulgent man disappeared to give place to the brutal
husband and domineering father. "Why the devil does that foolish girl,
who pretends to wish to speak to me, not come into my study? and why on
earth does she want to speak to me at all?"

He was turning this thought over in his brain for the twentieth time,
when the door opened and Eugénie appeared, attired in a figured black
satin dress, her hair dressed and gloves on, as if she were going to the
Italian Opera. "Well, Eugénie, what is it you want with me? and why in
this solemn drawing-room when the study is so comfortable?"

"I quite understand why you ask, sir," said Eugénie, making a sign that
her father might be seated, "and in fact your two questions suggest
fully the theme of our conversation. I will answer them both, and
contrary to the usual method, the last first, because it is the least
difficult. I have chosen the drawing-room, sir, as our place of meeting,
in order to avoid the disagreeable impressions and influences of a
banker's study. Those gilded cashbooks, drawers locked like gates of
fortresses, heaps of bank-bills, come from I know not where, and the
quantities of letters from England, Holland, Spain, India, China, and
Peru, have generally a strange influence on a father's mind, and make
him forget that there is in the world an interest greater and more
sacred than the good opinion of his correspondents. I have, therefore,
chosen this drawing-room, where you see, smiling and happy in their
magnificent frames, your portrait, mine, my mother's, and all sorts of
rural landscapes and touching pastorals. I rely much on external
impressions; perhaps, with regard to you, they are immaterial, but I
should be no artist if I had not some fancies."

"Very well," replied M. Danglars, who had listened to all this preamble
with imperturbable coolness, but without understanding a word, since
like every man burdened with thoughts of the past, he was occupied with
seeking the thread of his own ideas in those of the speaker.

"There is, then, the second point cleared up, or nearly so," said
Eugénie, without the least confusion, and with that masculine
pointedness which distinguished her gesture and her language; "and you
appear satisfied with the explanation. Now, let us return to the first.
You ask me why I have requested this interview; I will tell you in two
words, sir; I will not marry count Andrea Cavalcanti."

Danglars leaped from his chair and raised his eyes and arms towards
heaven.


"Yes, indeed, sir," continued Eugénie, still quite calm; "you are
astonished, I see; for since this little affair began, I have not
manifested the slightest opposition, and yet I am always sure, when the
opportunity arrives, to oppose a determined and absolute will to people
who have not consulted me, and things which displease me. However, this
time, my tranquillity, or passiveness as philosophers say, proceeded
from another source; it proceeded from a wish, like a submissive and
devoted daughter" (a slight smile was observable on the purple lips of
the young girl), "to practice obedience."

"Well?" asked Danglars.

"Well, sir," replied Eugénie, "I have tried to the very last and now
that the moment has come, I feel in spite of all my efforts that it is
impossible."

"But," said Danglars, whose weak mind was at first quite overwhelmed
with the weight of this pitiless logic, marking evident premeditation
and force of will, "what is your reason for this refusal, Eugénie? what
reason do you assign?"

"My reason?" replied the young girl. "Well, it is not that the man is
more ugly, more foolish, or more disagreeable than any other; no, M.
Andrea Cavalcanti may appear to those who look at men's faces and
figures as a very good specimen of his kind. It is not, either, that my
heart is less touched by him than any other; that would be a
schoolgirl's reason, which I consider quite beneath me. I actually love
no one, sir; you know it, do you not? I do not then see why, without
real necessity, I should encumber my life with a perpetual companion.
Has not some sage said, 'Nothing too much'? and another, 'I carry all my
effects with me'? I have been taught these two aphorisms in Latin and in
Greek; one is, I believe, from Phædrus, and the other from Bias. Well,
my dear father, in the shipwreck of life--for life is an eternal
shipwreck of our hopes--I cast into the sea my useless encumbrance, that
is all, and I remain with my own will, disposed to live perfectly alone,
and consequently perfectly free."

"Unhappy girl, unhappy girl!" murmured Danglars, turning pale, for he
knew from long experience the solidity of the obstacle he had so
suddenly encountered.

"Unhappy girl," replied Eugénie, "unhappy girl, do you say, sir? No,
indeed; the exclamation appears quite theatrical and affected. Happy, on
the contrary, for what am I in want of? The world calls me beautiful. It
is something to be well received. I like a favorable reception; it
expands the countenance, and those around me do not then appear so ugly.
I possess a share of wit, and a certain relative sensibility, which
enables me to draw from life in general, for the support of mine, all I
meet with that is good, like the monkey who cracks the nut to get at its
contents. I am rich, for you have one of the first fortunes in France. I
am your only daughter, and you are not so exacting as the fathers of the
Porte Saint-Martin and Gaîté, who disinherit their daughters for not
giving them grandchildren. Besides, the provident law has deprived you
of the power to disinherit me, at least entirely, as it has also of the
power to compel me to marry Monsieur This or Monsieur That. And so--
being, beautiful, witty, somewhat talented, as the comic operas say, and
rich--and that is happiness, sir--why do you call me unhappy?"

Danglars, seeing his daughter smiling, and proud even to insolence,
could not entirely repress his brutal feelings, but they betrayed
themselves only by an exclamation. Under the fixed and inquiring gaze
levelled at him from under those beautiful black eyebrows, he prudently
turned away, and calmed himself immediately, daunted by the power of a
resolute mind. "Truly, my daughter," replied he with a smile, "you are
all you boast of being, excepting one thing; I will not too hastily tell
you which, but would rather leave you to guess it." Eugénie looked at
Danglars, much surprised that one flower of her crown of pride, with
which she had so superbly decked herself, should be disputed. "My
daughter," continued the banker, "you have perfectly explained to me the
sentiments which influence a girl like you, who is determined she will
not marry; now it remains for me to tell you the motives of a father
like me, who has decided that his daughter shall marry." Eugénie bowed,
not as a submissive daughter, but as an adversary prepared for a
discussion.

"My daughter," continued Danglars, "when a father asks his daughter to
choose a husband, he has always some reason for wishing her to marry.
Some are affected with the mania of which you spoke just now, that of
living again in their grandchildren. This is not my weakness, I tell you
at once; family joys have no charm for me. I may acknowledge this to a
daughter whom I know to be philosophical enough to understand my
indifference, and not to impute it to me as a crime."

"This is not to the purpose," said Eugénie; "let us speak candidly, sir;
I admire candor."

"Oh," said Danglars, "I can, when circumstances render it desirable,
adopt your system, although it may not be my general practice. I will
therefore proceed. I have proposed to you to marry, not for your sake,
for indeed I did not think of you in the least at the moment (you admire
candor, and will now be satisfied, I hope); but because it suited me to
marry you as soon as possible, on account of certain commercial
speculations I am desirous of entering into." Eugénie became uneasy.


"It is just as I tell you, I assure you, and you must not be angry with
me, for you have sought this disclosure. I do not willingly enter into
arithmetical explanations with an artist like you, who fears to enter my
study lest she should imbibe disagreeable or anti-poetic impressions and
sensations. But in that same banker's study, where you very willingly
presented yourself yesterday to ask for the thousand francs I give you
monthly for pocket-money, you must know, my dear young lady, that many
things may be learned, useful even to a girl who will not marry. There
one may learn, for instance, what, out of regard to your nervous
susceptibility, I will inform you of in the drawing-room, namely, that
the credit of a banker is his physical and moral life; that credit
sustains him as breath animates the body; and M. de Monte Cristo once
gave me a lecture on that subject, which I have never forgotten. There
we may learn that as credit sinks, the body becomes a corpse, and this
is what must happen very soon to the banker who is proud to own so good
a logician as you for his daughter." But Eugénie, instead of stooping,
drew herself up under the blow. "Ruined?" said she.

"Exactly, my daughter; that is precisely what I mean," said Danglars,
almost digging his nails into his breast, while he preserved on his
harsh features the smile of the heartless though clever man; "ruined--
