reminiscences, he thought not of Albert, of Beauchamp, of Château-
Renaud, or of any of that group; but he thought of that courageous woman
who had come to plead for her son's life, to whom he had offered his,
and who had now saved it by the revelation of a dreadful family secret,
capable of destroying forever in that young man's heart every feeling of
filial piety.

"Providence still," murmured he; "now only am I fully convinced of being
the emissary of God!"



Chapter 91. Mother and Son

The Count of Monte Cristo bowed to the five young men with a melancholy
and dignified smile, and got into his carriage with Maximilian and
Emmanuel. Albert, Beauchamp, and Château-Renaud remained alone. Albert
looked at his two friends, not timidly, but in a way that appeared to
ask their opinion of what he had just done.

"Indeed, my dear friend," said Beauchamp first, who had either the most
feeling or the least dissimulation, "allow me to congratulate you; this
is a very unhoped-for conclusion of a very disagreeable affair."

Albert remained silent and wrapped in thought. Château-Renaud contented
himself with tapping his boot with his flexible cane. "Are we not
going?" said he, after this embarrassing silence. "When you please,"
replied Beauchamp; "allow me only to compliment M. de Morcerf, who has
given proof today of rare chivalric generosity."

"Oh, yes," said Château-Renaud.

"It is magnificent," continued Beauchamp, "to be able to exercise so
much self-control!"

"Assuredly; as for me, I should have been incapable of it," said
Château-Renaud, with most significant coolness.

"Gentlemen," interrupted Albert, "I think you did not understand that
something very serious had passed between M. de Monte Cristo and
myself."

"Possibly, possibly," said Beauchamp immediately; "but every simpleton
would not be able to understand your heroism, and sooner or later you
will find yourself compelled to explain it to them more energetically
than would be convenient to your bodily health and the duration of your
life. May I give you a friendly counsel? Set out for Naples, the Hague,
or St. Petersburg--calm countries, where the point of honor is better
understood than among our hot-headed Parisians. Seek quietude and
oblivion, so that you may return peaceably to France after a few years.
Am I not right, M. de Château-Renaud?"


"That is quite my opinion," said the gentleman; "nothing induces serious
duels so much as a duel forsworn."

"Thank you, gentlemen," replied Albert, with a smile of indifference; "I
shall follow your advice--not because you give it, but because I had
before intended to quit France. I thank you equally for the service you
have rendered me in being my seconds. It is deeply engraved on my heart,
and, after what you have just said, I remember that only." Château-
Renaud and Beauchamp looked at each other; the impression was the same
on both of them, and the tone in which Morcerf had just expressed his
thanks was so determined that the position would have become
embarrassing for all if the conversation had continued.

"Good-bye, Albert," said Beauchamp suddenly, carelessly extending his
hand to the young man. The latter did not appear to arouse from his
lethargy; in fact, he did not notice the offered hand. "Good-bye," said
Château-Renaud in his turn, keeping his little cane in his left hand,
and saluting with his right. Albert's lips scarcely whispered "Good-
bye," but his look was more explicit; it expressed a whole poem of
restrained anger, proud disdain, and generous indignation. He preserved
his melancholy and motionless position for some time after his two
friends had regained their carriage; then suddenly unfastening his horse
from the little tree to which his servant had tied it, he mounted and
galloped off in the direction of Paris.

In a quarter of an hour he was entering the house in the Rue du Helder.
As he alighted, he thought he saw his father's pale face behind the
curtain of the count's bedroom. Albert turned away his head with a sigh,
and went to his own apartments. He cast one lingering look on all the
luxuries which had rendered life so easy and so happy since his infancy;
he looked at the pictures, whose faces seemed to smile, and the
landscapes, which appeared painted in brighter colors. Then he took away
his mother's portrait, with its oaken frame, leaving the gilt frame from
which he took it black and empty. Then he arranged all his beautiful
Turkish arms, his fine English guns, his Japanese china, his cups
mounted in silver, his artistic bronzes by Feuchères or Barye; examined
the cupboards, and placed the key in each; threw into a drawer of his
secretary desk, which he left open, all the pocket-money he had about
him, and with it the thousand fancy jewels from his vases and his jewel-
boxes; then he made an exact inventory of everything, and placed it in
the most conspicuous part of the table, after putting aside the books
and papers which had collected there.

At the beginning of this work, his servant, notwithstanding orders to
the contrary, came to his room. "What do you want?" asked he, with a
more sorrowful than angry tone. "Pardon me, sir," replied the valet;
"you had forbidden me to disturb you, but the Count of Morcerf has
called me."


"Well!" said Albert.

"I did not like to go to him without first seeing you."

"Why?"

"Because the count is doubtless aware that I accompanied you to the
meeting this morning."

"It is probable," said Albert.

"And since he has sent for me, it is doubtless to question me on what
happened there. What must I answer?"

"The truth."

"Then I shall say the duel did not take place?"

"You will say I apologized to the Count of Monte Cristo. Go."

The valet bowed and retired, and Albert returned to his inventory. As he
was finishing this work, the sound of horses prancing in the yard, and
the wheels of a carriage shaking his window, attracted his attention. He
approached the window, and saw his father get into it, and drive away.
The door was scarcely closed when Albert bent his steps to his mother's
room; and, no one being there to announce him, he advanced to her
bedchamber, and distressed by what he saw and guessed, stopped for one
moment at the door. As if the same idea had animated these two beings,
Mercédès was doing the same in her apartments that he had just done in
his. Everything was in order,--laces, dresses, jewels, linen, money, all
were arranged in the drawers, and the countess was carefully collecting
the keys. Albert saw all these preparations and understood them, and
exclaiming, "My mother!" he threw his arms around her neck.

The artist who could have depicted the expression of these two
countenances would certainly have made of them a beautiful picture. All
these proofs of an energetic resolution, which Albert did not fear on
his own account, alarmed him for his mother. "What are you doing?" asked
he.

"What were you doing?" replied she.

"Oh, my mother!" exclaimed Albert, so overcome he could scarcely speak;
"it is not the same with you and me--you cannot have made the same
resolution I have, for I have come to warn you that I bid adieu to your
house, and--and to you."

"I also," replied Mercédès, "am going, and I acknowledge I had depended
on your accompanying me; have I deceived myself?"

"Mother," said Albert with firmness. "I cannot make you share the fate I
have planned for myself. I must live henceforth without rank and
fortune, and to begin this hard apprenticeship I must borrow from a
friend the loaf I shall eat until I have earned one. So, my dear mother,
I am going at once to ask Franz to lend me the small sum I shall require
to supply my present wants."

"You, my poor child, suffer poverty and hunger? Oh, do not say so; it
will break my resolutions."

"But not mine, mother," replied Albert. "I am young and strong; I
believe I am courageous, and since yesterday I have learned the power of
will. Alas, my dear mother, some have suffered so much, and yet live,
and have raised a new fortune on the ruin of all the promises of
happiness which heaven had made them--on the fragments of all the hope
which God had given them! I have seen that, mother; I know that from the
gulf in which their enemies have plunged them they have risen with so
much vigor and glory that in their turn they have ruled their former
conquerors, and have punished them. No, mother; from this moment I have
done with the past, and accept nothing from it--not even a name, because
you can understand that your son cannot bear the name of a man who ought
to blush for it before another."

"Albert, my child," said Mercédès, "if I had a stronger heart, that is
the counsel I would have given you; your conscience has spoken when my
voice became too weak; listen to its dictates. You had friends, Albert;
break off their acquaintance. But do not despair; you have life before
you, my dear Albert, for you are yet scarcely twenty-two years old; and
as a pure heart like yours wants a spotless name, take my father's--it
was Herrera. I am sure, my dear Albert, whatever may be your career, you
will soon render that name illustrious. Then, my son, return to the
world still more brilliant because of your former sorrows; and if I am
wrong, still let me cherish these hopes, for I have no future to look
forward to. For me the grave opens when I pass the threshold of this
house."

"I will fulfil all your wishes, my dear mother," said the young man.
"Yes, I share your hopes; the anger of heaven will not pursue us, since
you are pure and I am innocent. But, since our resolution is formed, let
us act promptly. M. de Morcerf went out about half an hour ago; the
opportunity is favorable to avoid an explanation."

"I am ready, my son," said Mercédès. Albert ran to fetch a carriage. He
recollected that there was a small furnished house to let in the Rue des
Saints-Pères, where his mother would find a humble but decent lodging,
and thither he intended conducting the countess. As the carriage stopped
at the door, and Albert was alighting, a man approached and gave him a
