"In what branch?"

"In the navy."

"Are you not his confessor?"

"No, sir; I believe he is a Lutheran."

"A Lutheran?"

"I say, I believe such is the case, I do not affirm it; besides, liberty
of conscience is established in France."

"Doubtless, and we are not now inquiring into his creed, but his
actions; in the name of the prefect of police, I ask you what you know
of him.

"He passes for a very charitable man. Our holy father, the pope, has
made him a knight of Jesus Christ for the services he rendered to the
Christians in the East; he has five or six rings as testimonials from
Eastern monarchs of his services."

"Does he wear them?"

"No, but he is proud of them; he is better pleased with rewards given to
the benefactors of man than to his destroyers."

"He is a Quaker then?"

"Exactly, he is a Quaker, with the exception of the peculiar dress."

"Has he any friends?"

"Yes, everyone who knows him is his friend."

"But has he any enemies?"

"One only."

"What is his name?"

"Lord Wilmore."

"Where is he?"

"He is in Paris just now."

"Can he give me any particulars?"

"Important ones; he was in India with Zaccone."

"Do you know his abode?"

"It's somewhere in the Chaussée d'Antin; but I know neither the street
nor the number."


"Are you at variance with the Englishman?"

"I love Zaccone, and he hates him; we are consequently not friends."

"Do you think the Count of Monte Cristo had ever been in France before
he made this visit to Paris?"

"To that question I can answer positively; no, sir, he had not, because
he applied to me six months ago for the particulars he required, and as
I did not know when I might again come to Paris, I recommended M.
Cavalcanti to him."

"Andrea?"

"No, Bartolomeo, his father."

"Now, sir, I have but one question more to ask, and I charge you, in the
name of honor, of humanity, and of religion, to answer me candidly."

"What is it, sir?"

"Do you know with what design M. de Monte Cristo purchased a house at
Auteuil?"

"Certainly, for he told me."

"What is it, sir?"

"To make a lunatic asylum of it, similar to that founded by the Count of
Pisani at Palermo. Do you know about that institution?"

"I have heard of it."

"It is a magnificent charity." Having said this, the abbé bowed to imply
he wished to pursue his studies. The visitor either understood the
abbé's meaning, or had no more questions to ask; he arose, and the abbé
accompanied him to the door. "You are a great almsgiver," said the
visitor, "and although you are said to be rich, I will venture to offer
you something for your poor people; will you accept my offering?"

"I thank you, sir; I am only jealous in one thing, and that is that the
relief I give should be entirely from my own resources."

"However----"

"My resolution, sir, is unchangeable, but you have only to search for
yourself and you will find, alas, but too many objects upon whom to
exercise your benevolence." The abbé once more bowed as he opened the
door, the stranger bowed and took his leave, and the carriage conveyed
him straight to the house of M. de Villefort. An hour afterwards the
carriage was again ordered, and this time it went to the Rue Fontaine-
Saint-George, and stopped at No. 5, where Lord Wilmore lived. The
stranger had written to Lord Wilmore, requesting an interview, which the
latter had fixed for ten o'clock. As the envoy of the prefect of police
arrived ten minutes before ten, he was told that Lord Wilmore, who was
precision and punctuality personified, was not yet come in, but that he
would be sure to return as the clock struck.

The visitor was introduced into the drawing-room, which was like all
other furnished drawing-rooms. A mantle-piece, with two modern Sèvres
vases, a timepiece representing Cupid with his bent bow, a mirror with
an engraving on each side--one representing Homer carrying his guide,
the other, Belisarius begging--a grayish paper; red and black tapestry--
such was the appearance of Lord Wilmore's drawing-room. It was
illuminated by lamps with ground-glass shades which gave only a feeble
light, as if out of consideration for the envoy's weak sight. After ten
minutes' expectation the clock struck ten; at the fifth stroke the door
opened and Lord Wilmore appeared. He was rather above the middle height,
with thin reddish whiskers, light complexion and light hair, turning
rather gray. He was dressed with all the English peculiarity, namely, in
a blue coat, with gilt buttons and high collar, in the fashion of 1811,
a white kerseymere waistcoat, and nankeen pantaloons, three inches too
short, but which were prevented by straps from slipping up to the knee.
His first remark on entering was,--"You know, sir, I do not speak
French?"

"I know you do not like to converse in our language," replied the envoy.

"But you may use it," replied Lord Wilmore; "I understand it."

"And I," replied the visitor, changing his idiom, "know enough of
English to keep up the conversation. Do not put yourself to the
slightest inconvenience."

"Aw?" said Lord Wilmore, with that tone which is only known to natives
of Great Britain.

The envoy presented his letter of introduction, which the latter read
with English coolness, and having finished,--"I understand," said he,
"perfectly."


Then began the questions, which were similar to those which had been
addressed to the Abbé Busoni. But as Lord Wilmore, in the character of
the count's enemy, was less restrained in his answers, they were more
numerous; he described the youth of Monte Cristo, who he said, at ten
years of age, entered the service of one of the petty sovereigns of
India who make war on the English. It was there Wilmore had first met
him and fought against him; and in that war Zaccone had been taken
prisoner, sent to England, and consigned to the hulks, whence he had
escaped by swimming. Then began his travels, his duels, his caprices;
then the insurrection in Greece broke out, and he had served in the
Grecian ranks. While in that service he had discovered a silver mine in
the mountains of Thessaly, but he had been careful to conceal it from
everyone. After the battle of Navarino, when the Greek government was
consolidated, he asked of King Otho a mining grant for that district,
which was given him. Hence that immense fortune, which, in Lord
Wilmore's opinion, possibly amounted to one or two millions per annum,--
a precarious fortune, which might be momentarily lost by the failure of
the mine.

"But," asked the visitor, "do you know why he came to France?"

"He is speculating in railways," said Lord Wilmore, "and as he is an
expert chemist and physicist, he has invented a new system of
telegraphy, which he is seeking to bring to perfection."

"How much does he spend yearly?" asked the prefect.

"Not more than five or six hundred thousand francs," said Lord Wilmore;
"he is a miser." Hatred evidently inspired the Englishman, who, knowing
no other reproach to bring on the count, accused him of avarice. "Do you
know his house at Auteuil?"

"Certainly."

"What do you know respecting it?"

"Do you wish to know why he bought it?"

"Yes."

"The count is a speculator, who will certainly ruin himself in
experiments. He supposes there is in the neighborhood of the house he
has bought a mineral spring equal to those at Bagnères, Luchon, and
Cauterets. He is going to turn his house into a _Badhaus_, as the
Germans term it. He has already dug up all the garden two or three times
to find the famous spring, and, being unsuccessful, he will soon
purchase all the contiguous houses. Now, as I dislike him, and hope his
railway, his electric telegraph, or his search for baths, will ruin him,
I am watching for his discomfiture, which must soon take place."

"What was the cause of your quarrel?"
