off.

Whoever had selected this retired portion of the grounds as the boundary
of a walk, or as a place for meditation, was abundantly justified in the
choice by the absence of all glare, the cool, refreshing shade, the
screen it afforded from the scorching rays of the sun, that found no
entrance there even during the burning days of hottest summer, the
incessant and melodious warbling of birds, and the entire removal from
either the noise of the street or the bustle of the mansion. On the
evening of one of the warmest days spring had yet bestowed on the
inhabitants of Paris, might be seen negligently thrown upon the stone
bench, a book, a parasol, and a work-basket, from which hung a partly
embroidered cambric handkerchief, while at a little distance from these
articles was a young woman, standing close to the iron gate, endeavoring
to discern something on the other side by means of the openings in the
planks,--the earnestness of her attitude and the fixed gaze with which
she seemed to seek the object of her wishes, proving how much her
feelings were interested in the matter. At that instant the little side-
gate leading from the waste ground to the street was noiselessly opened,
and a tall, powerful young man appeared. He was dressed in a common gray
blouse and velvet cap, but his carefully arranged hair, beard and
moustache, all of the richest and glossiest black, ill accorded with his
plebeian attire. After casting a rapid glance around him, in order to
assure himself that he was unobserved, he entered by the small gate,
and, carefully closing and securing it after him, proceeded with a
hurried step towards the barrier.

At the sight of him she expected, though probably not in such a costume,
the young woman started in terror, and was about to make a hasty
retreat. But the eye of love had already seen, even through the narrow
chinks of the wooden palisades, the movement of the white robe, and
observed the fluttering of the blue sash. Pressing his lips close to the
planks, he exclaimed, "Don't be alarmed, Valentine--it is I!" Again the
timid girl found courage to return to the gate, saying, as she did so,
"And why do you come so late today? It is almost dinner-time, and I had
to use no little diplomacy to get rid of my watchful mother-in-law, my
too-devoted maid, and my troublesome brother, who is always teasing me
about coming to work at my embroidery, which I am in a fair way never to
get done. So pray excuse yourself as well as you can for having made me
wait, and, after that, tell me why I see you in a dress so singular that
at first I did not recognize you."

"Dearest Valentine," said the young man, "the difference between our
respective stations makes me fear to offend you by speaking of my love,
but yet I cannot find myself in your presence without longing to pour
forth my soul, and tell you how fondly I adore you. If it be but to
carry away with me the recollection of such sweet moments, I could even
thank you for chiding me, for it leaves me a gleam of hope, that if you
did not expect me (and that indeed would be worse than vanity to
suppose), at least I was in your thoughts. You asked me the cause of my
being late, and why I come disguised. I will candidly explain the reason
of both, and I trust to your goodness to pardon me. I have chosen a
trade."

"A trade? Oh, Maximilian, how can you jest at a time when we have such
deep cause for uneasiness?"

"Heaven keep me from jesting with that which is far dearer to me than
life itself! But listen to me, Valentine, and I will tell you all about
it. I became weary of ranging fields and scaling walls, and seriously
alarmed at the idea suggested by you, that if caught hovering about here
your father would very likely have me sent to prison as a thief. That
would compromise the honor of the French army, to say nothing of the
fact that the continual presence of a captain of Spahis in a place where
no warlike projects could be supposed to account for it might well
create surprise; so I have become a gardener, and, consequently, adopted
the costume of my calling."

"What excessive nonsense you talk, Maximilian!"

"Nonsense? Pray do not call what I consider the wisest action of my life
by such a name. Consider, by becoming a gardener I effectually screen
our meetings from all suspicion or danger."


"I beseech of you, Maximilian, to cease trifling, and tell me what you
really mean."

"Simply, that having ascertained that the piece of ground on which I
stand was to let, I made application for it, was readily accepted by the
proprietor, and am now master of this fine crop of lucern. Think of
that, Valentine! There is nothing now to prevent my building myself a
little hut on my plantation, and residing not twenty yards from you.
Only imagine what happiness that would afford me. I can scarcely contain
myself at the bare idea. Such felicity seems above all price--as a thing
impossible and unattainable. But would you believe that I purchase all
this delight, joy, and happiness, for which I would cheerfully have
surrendered ten years of my life, at the small cost of 500 francs per
annum, paid quarterly? Henceforth we have nothing to fear. I am on my
own ground, and have an undoubted right to place a ladder against the
wall, and to look over when I please, without having any apprehensions
of being taken off by the police as a suspicious character. I may also
enjoy the precious privilege of assuring you of my fond, faithful, and
unalterable affection, whenever you visit your favorite bower, unless,
indeed, it offends your pride to listen to professions of love from the
lips of a poor workingman, clad in a blouse and cap." A faint cry of
mingled pleasure and surprise escaped from the lips of Valentine, who
almost instantly said, in a saddened tone, as though some envious cloud
darkened the joy which illumined her heart, "Alas, no, Maximilian, this
must not be, for many reasons. We should presume too much on our own
strength, and, like others, perhaps, be led astray by our blind
confidence in each other's prudence."

"How can you for an instant entertain so unworthy a thought, dear
Valentine? Have I not, from the first blessed hour of our acquaintance,
schooled all my words and actions to your sentiments and ideas? And you
have, I am sure, the fullest confidence in my honor. When you spoke to
me of experiencing a vague and indefinite sense of coming danger, I
placed myself blindly and devotedly at your service, asking no other
reward than the pleasure of being useful to you; and have I ever since,
by word or look, given you cause of regret for having selected me from
the numbers that would willingly have sacrificed their lives for you?
You told me, my dear Valentine, that you were engaged to M. d'Epinay,
and that your father was resolved upon completing the match, and that
from his will there was no appeal, as M. de Villefort was never known to
change a determination once formed. I kept in the background, as you
wished, and waited, not for the decision of your heart or my own, but
hoping that Providence would graciously interpose in our behalf, and
order events in our favor. But what cared I for delays or difficulties,
Valentine, as long as you confessed that you loved me, and took pity on
me? If you will only repeat that avowal now and then, I can endure
anything."

"Ah, Maximilian, that is the very thing that makes you so bold, and
which renders me at once so happy and unhappy, that I frequently ask
myself whether it is better for me to endure the harshness of my mother-
in-law, and her blind preference for her own child, or to be, as I now
am, insensible to any pleasure save such as I find in these meetings, so
fraught with danger to both."

"I will not admit that word," returned the young man; "it is at once
cruel and unjust. Is it possible to find a more submissive slave than
myself? You have permitted me to converse with you from time to time,
Valentine, but forbidden my ever following you in your walks or
elsewhere--have I not obeyed? And since I found means to enter this
inclosure to exchange a few words with you through this gate--to be
close to you without really seeing you--have I ever asked so much as to
touch the hem of your gown or tried to pass this barrier which is but a
trifle to one of my youth and strength? Never has a complaint or a
murmur escaped me. I have been bound by my promises as rigidly as any
knight of olden times. Come, come, dearest Valentine, confess that what
I say is true, lest I be tempted to call you unjust."


"It is true," said Valentine, as she passed the end of her slender
fingers through a small opening in the planks, and permitted Maximilian
to press his lips to them, "and you are a true and faithful friend; but
still you acted from motives of self-interest, my dear Maximilian, for
you well knew that from the moment in which you had manifested an
opposite spirit all would have been ended between us. You promised to
bestow on me the friendly affection of a brother. For I have no friend
but yourself upon earth, who am neglected and forgotten by my father,
harassed and persecuted by my mother-in-law, and left to the sole
companionship of a paralyzed and speechless old man, whose withered hand
can no longer press mine, and who can speak to me with the eye alone,
although there still lingers in his heart the warmest tenderness for his
poor grandchild. Oh, how bitter a fate is mine, to serve either as a
victim or an enemy to all who are stronger than myself, while my only
friend and supporter is a living corpse! Indeed, indeed, Maximilian, I
am very miserable, and if you love me it must be out of pity."

"Valentine," replied the young man, deeply affected, "I will not say you
are all I love in the world, for I dearly prize my sister and brother-
in-law; but my affection for them is calm and tranquil, in no manner
resembling what I feel for you. When I think of you my heart beats fast,
the blood burns in my veins, and I can hardly breathe; but I solemnly
promise you to restrain all this ardor, this fervor and intensity of
feeling, until you yourself shall require me to render them available in
serving or assisting you. M. Franz is not expected to return home for a
year to come, I am told; in that time many favorable and unforeseen
chances may befriend us. Let us, then, hope for the best; hope is so
sweet a comforter. Meanwhile, Valentine, while reproaching me with
selfishness, think a little what you have been to me--the beautiful but
cold resemblance of a marble Venus. What promise of future reward have
you made me for all the submission and obedience I have evinced?--none
whatever. What granted me?--scarcely more. You tell me of M. Franz
d'Epinay, your betrothed lover, and you shrink from the idea of being
his wife; but tell me, Valentine, is there no other sorrow in your
heart? You see me devoted to you, body and soul, my life and each warm
drop that circles round my heart are consecrated to your service; you
know full well that my existence is bound up in yours--that were I to
lose you I would not outlive the hour of such crushing misery; yet you
speak with calmness of the prospect of your being the wife of another!
Oh, Valentine, were I in your place, and did I feel conscious, as you
do, of being worshipped, adored, with such a love as mine, a hundred
times at least should I have passed my hand between these iron bars, and
said, 'Take this hand, dearest Maximilian, and believe that, living or
dead, I am yours--yours only, and forever!'" The poor girl made no
reply, but her lover could plainly hear her sobs and tears. A rapid
change took place in the young man's feelings. "Dearest, dearest
Valentine," exclaimed he, "forgive me if I have offended you, and forget
the words I spoke if they have unwittingly caused you pain."

"No, Maximilian, I am not offended," answered she, "but do you not see
what a poor, helpless being I am, almost a stranger and an outcast in my
father's house, where even he is seldom seen; whose will has been
thwarted, and spirits broken, from the age of ten years, beneath the
iron rod so sternly held over me; oppressed, mortified, and persecuted,
day by day, hour by hour, minute by minute, no person has cared for,
even observed my sufferings, nor have I ever breathed one word on the
