
"I don't call those friends who betray and ruin you," murmured the wife
in her turn, in a low, muttering voice.

"Of course not!" rejoined Caderousse quickly; "no more do I, and that
was what I was observing to this gentleman just now. I said I looked
upon it as a sacrilegious profanation to reward treachery, perhaps
crime."

"Remember," answered the abbé calmly, as he replaced the jewel and its
case in the pocket of his cassock, "it is your fault, not mine, that I
do so. You will have the goodness to furnish me with the address of both
Fernand and Danglars, in order that I may execute Edmond's last wishes."
The agitation of Caderousse became extreme, and large drops of
perspiration rolled from his heated brow. As he saw the abbé rise from
his seat and go towards the door, as though to ascertain if his horse
were sufficiently refreshed to continue his journey, Caderousse and his
wife exchanged looks of deep meaning.

"There, you see, wife," said the former, "this splendid diamond might
all be ours, if we chose!"

"Do you believe it?"

"Why, surely a man of his holy profession would not deceive us!"

"Well," replied La Carconte, "do as you like. For my part, I wash my
hands of the affair." So saying, she once more climbed the staircase
leading to her chamber, her body convulsed with chills, and her teeth
rattling in her head, in spite of the intense heat of the weather.
Arrived at the top stair, she turned round, and called out, in a warning
tone, to her husband, "Gaspard, consider well what you are about to do!"


"I have both reflected and decided," answered he. La Carconte then
entered her chamber, the flooring of which creaked beneath her heavy,
uncertain tread, as she proceeded towards her armchair, into which she
fell as though exhausted.

"Well," asked the abbé, as he returned to the apartment below, "what
have you made up your mind to do?"

"To tell you all I know," was the reply.

"I certainly think you act wisely in so doing," said the priest. "Not
because I have the least desire to learn anything you may please to
conceal from me, but simply that if, through your assistance, I could
distribute the legacy according to the wishes of the testator, why, so
much the better, that is all."

"I hope it may be so," replied Caderousse, his face flushed with
cupidity.

"I am all attention," said the abbé.

"Stop a minute," answered Caderousse; "we might be interrupted in the
most interesting part of my story, which would be a pity; and it is as
well that your visit hither should be made known only to ourselves."
With these words he went stealthily to the door, which he closed, and,
by way of still greater precaution, bolted and barred it, as he was
accustomed to do at night. During this time the abbé had chosen his
place for listening at his ease. He removed his seat into a corner of
the room, where he himself would be in deep shadow, while the light
would be fully thrown on the narrator; then, with head bent down and
hands clasped, or rather clenched together, he prepared to give his
whole attention to Caderousse, who seated himself on the little stool,
exactly opposite to him.

"Remember, this is no affair of mine," said the trembling voice of La
Carconte, as though through the flooring of her chamber she viewed the
scene that was enacting below.

"Enough, enough!" replied Caderousse; "say no more about it; I will take
all the consequences upon myself." And he began his story.



Chapter 27. The Story

First, sir," said Caderousse, "you must make me a promise."

"What is that?" inquired the abbé.

"Why, if you ever make use of the details I am about to give you, that
you will never let anyone know that it was I who supplied them; for the
persons of whom I am about to talk are rich and powerful, and if they
only laid the tips of their fingers on me, I should break to pieces like
glass."

"Make yourself easy, my friend," replied the abbé. "I am a priest, and
confessions die in my breast. Recollect, our only desire is to carry
out, in a fitting manner, the last wishes of our friend. Speak, then,
without reserve, as without hatred; tell the truth, the whole truth; I
do not know, never may know, the persons of whom you are about to speak;
besides, I am an Italian, and not a Frenchman, and belong to God, and
not to man, and I shall shortly retire to my convent, which I have only
quitted to fulfil the last wishes of a dying man." This positive
assurance seemed to give Caderousse a little courage.

"Well, then, under these circumstances," said Caderousse, "I will, I
even believe I ought to undeceive you as to the friendship which poor
Edmond thought so sincere and unquestionable."

"Begin with his father, if you please." said the abbé; "Edmond talked to
me a great deal about the old man for whom he had the deepest love."

"The history is a sad one, sir," said Caderousse, shaking his head;
"perhaps you know all the earlier part of it?"

"Yes." answered the abbé; "Edmond related to me everything until the
moment when he was arrested in a small cabaret close to Marseilles."

"At La Réserve! Oh, yes; I can see it all before me this moment."

"Was it not his betrothal feast?"

"It was and the feast that began so gayly had a very sorrowful ending; a
police commissary, followed by four soldiers, entered, and Dantès was
arrested."

"Yes, and up to this point I know all," said the priest. "Dantès himself
only knew that which personally concerned him, for he never beheld again
the five persons I have named to you, or heard mention of anyone of
them."

"Well, when Dantès was arrested, Monsieur Morrel hastened to obtain the
particulars, and they were very sad. The old man returned alone to his
home, folded up his wedding suit with tears in his eyes, and paced up
and down his chamber the whole day, and would not go to bed at all, for
I was underneath him and heard him walking the whole night; and for
myself, I assure you I could not sleep either, for the grief of the poor
father gave me great uneasiness, and every step he took went to my heart
as really as if his foot had pressed against my breast. The next day
Mercédès came to implore the protection of M. de Villefort; she did not
obtain it, however, and went to visit the old man; when she saw him so
miserable and heart-broken, having passed a sleepless night, and not
touched food since the previous day, she wished him to go with her that
she might take care of him; but the old man would not consent. 'No,' was
the old man's reply, 'I will not leave this house, for my poor dear boy
loves me better than anything in the world; and if he gets out of prison
he will come and see me the first thing, and what would he think if I
did not wait here for him?' I heard all this from the window, for I was
anxious that Mercédès should persuade the old man to accompany her, for
his footsteps over my head night and day did not leave me a moment's
repose."

"But did you not go upstairs and try to console the poor old man?" asked
the abbé.

"Ah, sir," replied Caderousse, "we cannot console those who will not be
consoled, and he was one of these; besides, I know not why, but he
seemed to dislike seeing me. One night, however, I heard his sobs, and I
could not resist my desire to go up to him, but when I reached his door
he was no longer weeping but praying. I cannot now repeat to you, sir,
all the eloquent words and imploring language he made use of; it was
more than piety, it was more than grief, and I, who am no canter, and
hate the Jesuits, said then to myself, 'It is really well, and I am very
glad that I have not any children; for if I were a father and felt such
excessive grief as the old man does, and did not find in my memory or
heart all he is now saying, I should throw myself into the sea at once,
for I could not bear it.'"

"Poor father!" murmured the priest.

"From day to day he lived on alone, and more and more solitary. M.
Morrel and Mercédès came to see him, but his door was closed; and,
although I was certain he was at home, he would not make any answer. One
day, when, contrary to his custom, he had admitted Mercédès, and the
poor girl, in spite of her own grief and despair, endeavored to console
him, he said to her,--'Be assured, my dear daughter, he is dead; and
instead of expecting him, it is he who is awaiting us; I am quite happy,
for I am the oldest, and of course shall see him first.' However well
disposed a person may be, why you see we leave off after a time seeing
persons who are in sorrow, they make one melancholy; and so at last old
Dantès was left all to himself, and I only saw from time to time
strangers go up to him and come down again with some bundle they tried
to hide; but I guessed what these bundles were, and that he sold by
degrees what he had to pay for his subsistence. At length the poor old
fellow reached the end of all he had; he owed three quarters' rent, and
they threatened to turn him out; he begged for another week, which was
granted to him. I know this, because the landlord came into my apartment
when he left his. For the first three days I heard him walking about as
usual, but, on the fourth I heard nothing. I then resolved to go up to
him at all risks. The door was closed, but I looked through the keyhole,
and saw him so pale and haggard, that believing him very ill, I went and
told M. Morrel and then ran on to Mercédès. They both came immediately,
M. Morrel bringing a doctor, and the doctor said it was inflammation of
the bowels, and ordered him a limited diet. I was there, too, and I
never shall forget the old man's smile at this prescription. From that
time he received all who came; he had an excuse for not eating any more;
the doctor had put him on a diet." The abbé uttered a kind of groan.
"The story interests you, does it not, sir?" inquired Caderousse.

"Yes," replied the abbé, "it is very affecting."

"Mercédès came again, and she found him so altered that she was even
more anxious than before to have him taken to her own home. This was M.
Morrel's wish also, who would fain have conveyed the old man against his
consent; but the old man resisted, and cried so that they were actually
frightened. Mercédès remained, therefore, by his bedside, and M. Morrel
