
"But," said Franz, "the Corsican bandits that were among the crew of his
vessel?"

"Why, really the thing seems to me simple enough. Nobody knows better
than yourself that the bandits of Corsica are not rogues or thieves, but
purely and simply fugitives, driven by some sinister motive from their
native town or village, and that their fellowship involves no disgrace
or stigma; for my own part, I protest that, should I ever go to Corsica,
my first visit, ere even I presented myself to the mayor or prefect,
should be to the bandits of Colomba, if I could only manage to find
them; for, on my conscience, they are a race of men I admire greatly."

"Still," persisted Franz, "I suppose you will allow that such men as
Vampa and his band are regular villains, who have no other motive than
plunder when they seize your person. How do you explain the influence
the count evidently possessed over those ruffians?"

"My good friend, as in all probability I own my present safety to that
influence, it would ill become me to search too closely into its source;
therefore, instead of condemning him for his intimacy with outlaws, you
must give me leave to excuse any little irregularity there may be in
such a connection; not altogether for preserving my life, for my own
idea was that it never was in much danger, but certainly for saving me
4,000 piastres, which, being translated, means neither more nor less
than 24,000 livres of our money--a sum at which, most assuredly, I
should never have been estimated in France, proving most indisputably,"
added Albert with a laugh, "that no prophet is honored in his own
country."

"Talking of countries," replied Franz, "of what country is the count,
what is his native tongue, whence does he derive his immense fortune,
and what were those events of his early life--a life as marvellous as
unknown--that have tinctured his succeeding years with so dark and
gloomy a misanthropy? Certainly these are questions that, in your place,
I should like to have answered."

"My dear Franz," replied Albert, "when, upon receipt of my letter, you
found the necessity of asking the count's assistance, you promptly went
to him, saying, 'My friend Albert de Morcerf is in danger; help me to
deliver him.' Was not that nearly what you said?"


"It was."

"Well, then, did he ask you, 'Who is M. Albert de Morcerf? how does he
come by his name--his fortune? what are his means of existence? what is
his birthplace? of what country is he a native?' Tell me, did he put all
these questions to you?"

"I confess he asked me none."

"No; he merely came and freed me from the hands of Signor Vampa, where,
I can assure you, in spite of all my outward appearance of ease and
unconcern, I did not very particularly care to remain. Now, then, Franz,
when, for services so promptly and unhesitatingly rendered, he but asks
me in return to do for him what is done daily for any Russian prince or
Italian nobleman who may pass through Paris--merely to introduce him
into society--would you have me refuse? My good fellow, you must have
lost your senses to think it possible I could act with such cold-blooded
policy." And this time it must be confessed that, contrary to the usual
state of affairs in discussions between the young men, the effective
arguments were all on Albert's side.

"Well," said Franz with a sigh, "do as you please my dear viscount, for
your arguments are beyond my powers of refutation. Still, in spite of
all, you must admit that this Count of Monte Cristo is a most singular
personage."

"He is a philanthropist," answered the other; "and no doubt his motive
in visiting Paris is to compete for the Monthyon prize, given, as you
are aware, to whoever shall be proved to have most materially advanced
the interests of virtue and humanity. If my vote and interest can obtain
it for him, I will readily give him the one and promise the other. And
now, my dear Franz, let us talk of something else. Come, shall we take
our luncheon, and then pay a last visit to St. Peter's?" Franz silently
assented; and the following afternoon, at half-past five o'clock, the
young men parted. Albert de Morcerf to return to Paris, and Franz
d'Epinay to pass a fortnight at Venice. But, ere he entered his
travelling carriage, Albert, fearing that his expected guest might
forget the engagement he had entered into, placed in the care of a
waiter at the hotel a card to be delivered to the Count of Monte Cristo,
on which, beneath the name of Vicomte Albert de Morcerf, he had written
in pencil:

"27, _Rue du Helder, on the_ 21_st May, half-past ten_ A.M."



Chapter 39. The Guests

In the house in the Rue du Helder, where Albert had invited the Count of
Monte Cristo, everything was being prepared on the morning of the 21st
of May to do honor to the occasion. Albert de Morcerf inhabited a
pavilion situated at the corner of a large court, and directly opposite
another building, in which were the servants' apartments. Two windows
only of the pavilion faced the street; three other windows looked into
the court, and two at the back into the garden.

Between the court and the garden, built in the heavy style of the
imperial architecture, was the large and fashionable dwelling of the
Count and Countess of Morcerf.

A high wall surrounded the whole of the property, surmounted at
intervals by vases filled with flowers, and broken in the centre by a
large gate of gilded iron, which served as the carriage entrance. A
small door, close to the lodge of the _concierge_, gave ingress and
egress to the servants and masters when they were on foot.

It was easy to discover that the delicate care of a mother, unwilling to
part from her son, and yet aware that a young man of the viscount's age
required the full exercise of his liberty, had chosen this habitation
for Albert. There were not lacking, however, evidences of what we may
call the intelligent egoism of a youth who is charmed with the indolent,
careless life of an only son, and who lives as it were in a gilded cage.
By means of the two windows looking into the street, Albert could see
all that passed; the sight of what is going on is necessary to young
men, who always want to see the world traverse their horizon, even if
that horizon is only a public thoroughfare. Then, should anything appear
to merit a more minute examination, Albert de Morcerf could follow up
his researches by means of a small gate, similar to that close to the
_concierge's_ door, and which merits a particular description.

It was a little entrance that seemed never to have been opened since the
house was built, so entirely was it covered with dust and dirt; but the
well-oiled hinges and locks told quite another story. This door was a
mockery to the _concierge_, from whose vigilance and jurisdiction it was
free, and, like that famous portal in the _Arabian Nights_, opening at
the "_Sesame_" of Ali Baba, it was wont to swing backward at a
cabalistic word or a concerted tap from without from the sweetest voices
or whitest fingers in the world.

At the end of a long corridor, with which the door communicated, and
which formed the antechamber, was, on the right, Albert's breakfast-
room, looking into the court, and on the left the salon, looking into
the garden. Shrubs and creeping plants covered the windows, and hid from
the garden and court these two apartments, the only rooms into which, as
they were on the ground floor, the prying eyes of the curious could
penetrate.

On the floor above were similar rooms, with the addition of a third,
formed out of the antechamber; these three rooms were a salon, a
boudoir, and a bedroom. The salon downstairs was only an Algerian divan,
for the use of smokers. The boudoir upstairs communicated with the
bedchamber by an invisible door on the staircase; it was evident that
every precaution had been taken. Above this floor was a large _atelier_,
which had been increased in size by pulling down the partitions--a
pandemonium, in which the artist and the dandy strove for pre-eminence.

There were collected and piled up all Albert's successive caprices,
hunting-horns, bass-viols, flutes--a whole orchestra, for Albert had had
not a taste but a fancy for music; easels, palettes, brushes, pencils--
for music had been succeeded by painting; foils, boxing-gloves,
broadswords, and single-sticks--for, following the example of the
fashionable young men of the time, Albert de Morcerf cultivated, with
far more perseverance than music and drawing, the three arts that
complete a dandy's education, i.e., fencing, boxing, and single-stick;
and it was here that he received Grisier, Cook, and Charles Leboucher.

The rest of the furniture of this privileged apartment consisted of old
cabinets, filled with Chinese porcelain and Japanese vases, Lucca della
Robbia _faïence_, and Palissy platters; of old armchairs, in which
perhaps had sat Henry IV. or Sully, Louis XIII. or Richelieu--for two of
these armchairs, adorned with a carved shield, on which were engraved
the fleur-de-lis of France on an azure field, evidently came from the
Louvre, or, at least, some royal residence.

Over these dark and sombre chairs were thrown splendid stuffs, dyed
beneath Persia's sun, or woven by the fingers of the women of Calcutta
or of Chandernagor. What these stuffs did there, it was impossible to
say; they awaited, while gratifying the eyes, a destination unknown to
their owner himself; in the meantime they filled the place with their
golden and silky reflections.

In the centre of the room was a Roller and Blanchet "baby grand" piano
in rosewood, but holding the potentialities of an orchestra in its
narrow and sonorous cavity, and groaning beneath the weight of the
_chefs-d'œuvre_ of Beethoven, Weber, Mozart, Haydn, Grétry, and Porpora.

On the walls, over the doors, on the ceiling, were swords, daggers,
Malay creeses, maces, battle-axes; gilded, damasked, and inlaid suits of
armor; dried plants, minerals, and stuffed birds, their flame-colored
wings outspread in motionless flight, and their beaks forever open. This
was Albert's favorite lounging place.

However, the morning of the appointment, the young man had established
himself in the small salon downstairs. There, on a table, surrounded at
some distance by a large and luxurious divan, every species of tobacco
known,--from the yellow tobacco of Petersburg to the black of Sinai, and
so on along the scale from Maryland and Porto Rico, to Latakia,--was
exposed in pots of crackled earthenware of which the Dutch are so fond;
beside them, in boxes of fragrant wood, were ranged, according to their
size and quality, puros, regalias, havanas, and manillas; and, in an
open cabinet, a collection of German pipes, of chibouques, with their
amber mouth-pieces ornamented with coral, and of narghiles, with their
long tubes of morocco, awaiting the caprice or the sympathy of the
smokers.

Albert had himself presided at the arrangement, or, rather, the
symmetrical derangement, which, after coffee, the guests at a breakfast
