me draw in my head so quickly, for I was fearful he might also see me."

"Well?" inquired Dantès.

"You perceive then the utter impossibility of escaping through your
dungeon?"

"Then," pursued the young man eagerly--

"Then," answered the elder prisoner, "the will of God be done!" and as
the old man slowly pronounced those words, an air of profound
resignation spread itself over his careworn countenance. Dantès gazed on
the man who could thus philosophically resign hopes so long and ardently
nourished with an astonishment mingled with admiration.

"Tell me, I entreat of you, who and what you are?" said he at length;
"never have I met with so remarkable a person as yourself."

"Willingly," answered the stranger; "if, indeed, you feel any curiosity
respecting one, now, alas, powerless to aid you in any way."

"Say not so; you can console and support me by the strength of your own
powerful mind. Pray let me know who you really are?"

The stranger smiled a melancholy smile. "Then listen," said he. "I am
the Abbé Faria, and have been imprisoned as you know in this Château
d'If since the year 1811; previously to which I had been confined for
three years in the fortress of Fenestrelle. In the year 1811 I was
transferred to Piedmont in France. It was at this period I learned that
the destiny which seemed subservient to every wish formed by Napoleon,
had bestowed on him a son, named king of Rome even in his cradle. I was
very far then from expecting the change you have just informed me of;
namely, that four years afterwards, this colossus of power would be
overthrown. Then who reigns in France at this moment--Napoleon II.?"

"No, Louis XVIII."

"The brother of Louis XVI.! How inscrutable are the ways of providence--
for what great and mysterious purpose has it pleased heaven to abase the
man once so elevated, and raise up him who was so abased?"

Dantès' whole attention was riveted on a man who could thus forget his
own misfortunes while occupying himself with the destinies of others.

"Yes, yes," continued he, "'Twill be the same as it was in England.
After Charles I., Cromwell; after Cromwell, Charles II., and then James
II., and then some son-in-law or relation, some Prince of Orange, a
stadtholder who becomes a king. Then new concessions to the people, then
a constitution, then liberty. Ah, my friend!" said the abbé, turning
towards Dantès, and surveying him with the kindling gaze of a prophet,
"you are young, you will see all this come to pass."

"Probably, if ever I get out of prison!"

"True," replied Faria, "we are prisoners; but I forget this sometimes,
and there are even moments when my mental vision transports me beyond
these walls, and I fancy myself at liberty."

"But wherefore are you here?"

"Because in 1807 I dreamed of the very plan Napoleon tried to realize in
1811; because, like Machiavelli, I desired to alter the political face
of Italy, and instead of allowing it to be split up into a quantity of
petty principalities, each held by some weak or tyrannical ruler, I
sought to form one large, compact, and powerful empire; and, lastly,
because I fancied I had found my Cæsar Borgia in a crowned simpleton,
who feigned to enter into my views only to betray me. It was the plan of
Alexander VI. and Clement VII., but it will never succeed now, for they
attempted it fruitlessly, and Napoleon was unable to complete his work.
Italy seems fated to misfortune." And the old man bowed his head.

Dantès could not understand a man risking his life for such matters.
Napoleon certainly he knew something of, inasmuch as he had seen and
spoken with him; but of Clement VII. and Alexander VI. he knew nothing.

"Are you not," he asked, "the priest who here in the Château d'If is
generally thought to be--ill?"

"Mad, you mean, don't you?"

"I did not like to say so," answered Dantès, smiling.

"Well, then," resumed Faria with a bitter smile, "let me answer your
question in full, by acknowledging that I am the poor mad prisoner of
the Château d'If, for many years permitted to amuse the different
visitors with what is said to be my insanity; and, in all probability, I
should be promoted to the honor of making sport for the children, if
such innocent beings could be found in an abode devoted like this to
suffering and despair."

Dantès remained for a short time mute and motionless; at length he
said,--"Then you abandon all hope of escape?"

"I perceive its utter impossibility; and I consider it impious to
attempt that which the Almighty evidently does not approve."

"Nay, be not discouraged. Would it not be expecting too much to hope to
succeed at your first attempt? Why not try to find an opening in another
direction from that which has so unfortunately failed?"

"Alas, it shows how little notion you can have of all it has cost me to
effect a purpose so unexpectedly frustrated, that you talk of beginning
over again. In the first place, I was four years making the tools I
possess, and have been two years scraping and digging out earth, hard as
granite itself; then what toil and fatigue has it not been to remove
huge stones I should once have deemed impossible to loosen. Whole days
have I passed in these Titanic efforts, considering my labor well repaid
if, by night-time I had contrived to carry away a square inch of this
hard-bound cement, changed by ages into a substance unyielding as the
stones themselves; then to conceal the mass of earth and rubbish I dug
up, I was compelled to break through a staircase, and throw the fruits
of my labor into the hollow part of it; but the well is now so
completely choked up, that I scarcely think it would be possible to add
another handful of dust without leading to discovery. Consider also that
I fully believed I had accomplished the end and aim of my undertaking,
for which I had so exactly husbanded my strength as to make it just hold
out to the termination of my enterprise; and now, at the moment when I
reckoned upon success, my hopes are forever dashed from me. No, I repeat
again, that nothing shall induce me to renew attempts evidently at
variance with the Almighty's pleasure."

Dantès held down his head, that the other might not see how joy at the
thought of having a companion outweighed the sympathy he felt for the
failure of the abbé's plans.

The abbé sank upon Edmond's bed, while Edmond himself remained standing.
Escape had never once occurred to him. There are, indeed, some things
which appear so impossible that the mind does not dwell on them for an
instant. To undermine the ground for fifty feet--to devote three years
to a labor which, if successful, would conduct you to a precipice
overhanging the sea--to plunge into the waves from the height of fifty,
sixty, perhaps a hundred feet, at the risk of being dashed to pieces
against the rocks, should you have been fortunate enough to have escaped
the fire of the sentinels; and even, supposing all these perils past,
then to have to swim for your life a distance of at least three miles
ere you could reach the shore--were difficulties so startling and
formidable that Dantès had never even dreamed of such a scheme,
resigning himself rather to death.

But the sight of an old man clinging to life with so desperate a
courage, gave a fresh turn to his ideas, and inspired him with new
courage. Another, older and less strong than he, had attempted what he
had not had sufficient resolution to undertake, and had failed only
because of an error in calculation. This same person, with almost
incredible patience and perseverance, had contrived to provide himself
with tools requisite for so unparalleled an attempt. Another had done
all this; why, then, was it impossible to Dantès? Faria had dug his way
through fifty feet, Dantès would dig a hundred; Faria, at the age of
fifty, had devoted three years to the task; he, who was but half as old,
would sacrifice six; Faria, a priest and savant, had not shrunk from the
idea of risking his life by trying to swim a distance of three miles to
one of the islands--Daume, Rattonneau, or Lemaire; should a hardy
sailor, an experienced diver, like himself, shrink from a similar task;
should he, who had so often for mere amusement's sake plunged to the
bottom of the sea to fetch up the bright coral branch, hesitate to
entertain the same project? He could do it in an hour, and how many
times had he, for pure pastime, continued in the water for more than
twice as long! At once Dantès resolved to follow the brave example of
his energetic companion, and to remember that what has once been done
may be done again.

After continuing some time in profound meditation, the young man
suddenly exclaimed, "I have found what you were in search of!"

Faria started: "Have you, indeed?" cried he, raising his head with quick
anxiety; "pray, let me know what it is you have discovered?"

"The corridor through which you have bored your way from the cell you
occupy here, extends in the same direction as the outer gallery, does it
not?"


"It does."

"And is not above fifteen feet from it?"

"About that."

"Well, then, I will tell you what we must do. We must pierce through the
corridor by forming a side opening about the middle, as it were the top
part of a cross. This time you will lay your plans more accurately; we
shall get out into the gallery you have described; kill the sentinel who
guards it, and make our escape. All we require to insure success is
courage, and that you possess, and strength, which I am not deficient
in; as for patience, you have abundantly proved yours--you shall now see
me prove mine."

"One instant, my dear friend," replied the abbé; "it is clear you do not
understand the nature of the courage with which I am endowed, and what
use I intend making of my strength. As for patience, I consider that I
have abundantly exercised that in beginning every morning the task of
the night before, and every night renewing the task of the day. But
then, young man (and I pray of you to give me your full attention), then
I thought I could not be doing anything displeasing to the Almighty in
trying to set an innocent being at liberty--one who had committed no
offence, and merited not condemnation."

"And have your notions changed?" asked Dantès with much surprise; "do
you think yourself more guilty in making the attempt since you have
encountered me?"
