"How so? The fortune is not her gift, but is inherited from my
relations."

"Certainly; and that is why M. and Madame de Saint-Méran have died; that
is why M. Noirtier was sentenced the day he made you his heir; that is
why you, in your turn, are to die--it is because your father would
inherit your property, and your brother, his only son, succeed to his."

"Edward? Poor child! Are all these crimes committed on his account?"

"Ah, then you at length understand?"

"Heaven grant that this may not be visited upon him!"

"Valentine, you are an angel!"

"But why is my grandfather allowed to live?"

"It was considered, that you dead, the fortune would naturally revert to
your brother, unless he were disinherited; and besides, the crime
appearing useless, it would be folly to commit it."

"And is it possible that this frightful combination of crimes has been
invented by a woman?"

"Do you recollect in the arbor of the Hôtel des Postes, at Perugia,
seeing a man in a brown cloak, whom your stepmother was questioning upon
_aqua tofana_? Well, ever since then, the infernal project has been
ripening in her brain."

"Ah, then, indeed, sir," said the sweet girl, bathed in tears, "I see
that I am condemned to die!"

"No, Valentine, for I have foreseen all their plots; no, your enemy is
conquered since we know her, and you will live, Valentine--live to be
happy yourself, and to confer happiness upon a noble heart; but to
insure this you must rely on me."

"Command me, sir--what am I to do?"

"You must blindly take what I give you."

"Alas, were it only for my own sake, I should prefer to die!"

"You must not confide in anyone--not even in your father."

"My father is not engaged in this fearful plot, is he, sir?" asked
Valentine, clasping her hands.

"No; and yet your father, a man accustomed to judicial accusations,
ought to have known that all these deaths have not happened naturally;
it is he who should have watched over you--he should have occupied my
place--he should have emptied that glass--he should have risen against
the assassin. Spectre against spectre!" he murmured in a low voice, as
he concluded his sentence.

"Sir," said Valentine, "I will do all I can to live, for there are two
beings who love me and will die if I die--my grandfather and
Maximilian."

"I will watch over them as I have over you."

"Well, sir, do as you will with me;" and then she added, in a low voice,
"oh, heavens, what will befall me?"

"Whatever may happen, Valentine, do not be alarmed; though you suffer;
though you lose sight, hearing, consciousness, fear nothing; though you
should awake and be ignorant where you are, still do not fear; even
though you should find yourself in a sepulchral vault or coffin.
Reassure yourself, then, and say to yourself: 'At this moment, a friend,
a father, who lives for my happiness and that of Maximilian, watches
over me!'"

"Alas, alas, what a fearful extremity!"

"Valentine, would you rather denounce your stepmother?"

"I would rather die a hundred times--oh, yes, die!"

"No, you will not die; but will you promise me, whatever happens, that
you will not complain, but hope?"

"I will think of Maximilian!"

"You are my own darling child, Valentine! I alone can save you, and I
will." Valentine in the extremity of her terror joined her hands,--for
she felt that the moment had arrived to ask for courage,--and began to
pray, and while uttering little more than incoherent words, she forgot
that her white shoulders had no other covering than her long hair, and
that the pulsations of her heart could be seen through the lace of her
nightdress. Monte Cristo gently laid his hand on the young girl's arm,
drew the velvet coverlet close to her throat, and said with a paternal
smile,--"My child, believe in my devotion to you as you believe in the
goodness of Providence and the love of Maximilian." Valentine gave him a
look full of gratitude, and remained as docile as a child.

Then he drew from his waistcoat-pocket the little emerald box, raised
the golden lid, and took from it a pastille about the size of a pea,
which he placed in her hand. She took it, and looked attentively on the
count; there was an expression on the face of her intrepid protector
which commanded her veneration. She evidently interrogated him by her
look. "Yes," said he. Valentine carried the pastille to her mouth, and
swallowed it. "And now, my dear child, adieu for the present. I will try
and gain a little sleep, for you are saved."

"Go," said Valentine, "whatever happens, I promise you not to fear."

Monte Cristo for some time kept his eyes fixed on the young girl, who
gradually fell asleep, yielding to the effects of the narcotic the count
had given her. Then he took the glass, emptied three parts of the
contents in the fireplace, that it might be supposed Valentine had taken
it, and replaced it on the table; then he disappeared, after throwing a
farewell glance on Valentine, who slept with the confidence and
innocence of an angel at the feet of the Lord.



Chapter 102. Valentine

The night-light continued to burn on the chimney-piece, exhausting the
last drops of oil which floated on the surface of the water. The globe
of the lamp appeared of a reddish hue, and the flame, brightening before
it expired, threw out the last flickerings which in an inanimate object
have been so often compared with the convulsions of a human creature in
its final agonies. A dull and dismal light was shed over the bedclothes
and curtains surrounding the young girl. All noise in the streets had
ceased, and the silence was frightful. It was then that the door of
Edward's room opened, and a head we have before noticed appeared in the
glass opposite; it was Madame de Villefort, who came to witness the
effects of the drink she had prepared. She stopped in the doorway,
listened for a moment to the flickering of the lamp, the only sound in
that deserted room, and then advanced to the table to see if Valentine's
glass were empty. It was still about a quarter full, as we before
stated. Madame de Villefort emptied the contents into the ashes, which
she disturbed that they might the more readily absorb the liquid; then
she carefully rinsed the glass, and wiping it with her handkerchief
replaced it on the table.

If anyone could have looked into the room just then he would have
noticed the hesitation with which Madame de Villefort approached the bed
and looked fixedly on Valentine. The dim light, the profound silence,
and the gloomy thoughts inspired by the hour, and still more by her own
conscience, all combined to produce a sensation of fear; the poisoner
was terrified at the contemplation of her own work. At length she
rallied, drew aside the curtain, and leaning over the pillow gazed
intently on Valentine. The young girl no longer breathed, no breath
issued through the half-closed teeth; the white lips no longer quivered-
-the eyes were suffused with a bluish vapor, and the long black lashes
rested on a cheek white as wax. Madame de Villefort gazed upon the face
so expressive even in its stillness; then she ventured to raise the
coverlet and press her hand upon the young girl's heart. It was cold and
motionless. She only felt the pulsation in her own fingers, and withdrew
her hand with a shudder. One arm was hanging out of the bed; from
shoulder to elbow it was moulded after the arms of Germain Pillon's
"Graces," [*] but the fore-arm seemed to be slightly distorted by
convulsion, and the hand, so delicately formed, was resting with stiff
outstretched fingers on the framework of the bed. The nails, too, were
turning blue.


* Germain Pillon was a famous French sculptor (1535-1598). His best
known work is "The Three Graces," now in the Louvre.

Madame de Villefort had no longer any doubt; all was over--she had
consummated the last terrible work she had to accomplish. There was no
more to do in the room, so the poisoner retired stealthily, as though
fearing to hear the sound of her own footsteps; but as she withdrew she
still held aside the curtain, absorbed in the irresistible attraction
always exerted by the picture of death, so long as it is merely
mysterious and does not excite disgust. Just then the lamp again
flickered; the noise startled Madame de Villefort, who shuddered and
dropped the curtain. Immediately afterwards the light expired, and the
room was plunged in frightful obscurity, while the clock at that minute
struck half-past four. Overpowered with agitation, the poisoner
succeeded in groping her way to the door, and reached her room in an
agony of fear.

The darkness lasted two hours longer; then by degrees a cold light crept
through the Venetian blinds, until at length it revealed the objects in
the room. About this time the nurse's cough was heard on the stairs and
the woman entered the room with a cup in her hand. To the tender eye of
a father or a lover, the first glance would have sufficed to reveal
Valentine's condition; but to this hireling, Valentine only appeared to
sleep. "Good," she exclaimed, approaching the table, "she has taken part
of her draught; the glass is three-quarters empty."

Then she went to the fireplace and lit the fire, and although she had
just left her bed, she could not resist the temptation offered by
Valentine's sleep, so she threw herself into an armchair to snatch a
little more rest. The clock striking eight awoke her. Astonished at the
prolonged slumber of the patient, and frightened to see that the arm was
still hanging out of the bed, she advanced towards Valentine, and for
the first time noticed the white lips. She tried to replace the arm, but
it moved with a frightful rigidity which could not deceive a sick-nurse.
She screamed aloud; then running to the door exclaimed,--"Help, help!"


"What is the matter?" asked M. d'Avrigny, at the foot of the stairs, it
being the hour he usually visited her.

