
"Oh, well, he will add, 'We are warranted in believing that this Fernand
is not the illustrious Count of Morcerf, who also bears the same
Christian name.'"

"I am determined not to be content with anything short of an entire
retractation."

"And you intend to make him do it in the presence of two witnesses, do
you?"

"Yes."

"You do wrong."

"Which means, I suppose, that you refuse the service which I asked of
you?"

"You know my theory regarding duels; I told you my opinion on that
subject, if you remember, when we were at Rome."

"Nevertheless, my dear count, I found you this morning engaged in an
occupation but little consistent with the notions you profess to
entertain."

"Because, my dear fellow, you understand one must never be eccentric. If
one's lot is cast among fools, it is necessary to study folly. I shall
perhaps find myself one day called out by some harebrained scamp, who
has no more real cause of quarrel with me than you have with Beauchamp;
he may take me to task for some foolish trifle or other, he will bring
his witnesses, or will insult me in some public place, and I am expected
to kill him for all that."

"You admit that you would fight, then? Well, if so, why do you object to
my doing so?"

"I do not say that you ought not to fight, I only say that a duel is a
serious thing, and ought not to be undertaken without due reflection."

"Did he reflect before he insulted my father?"

"If he spoke hastily, and owns that he did so, you ought to be
satisfied."

"Ah, my dear count, you are far too indulgent."

"And you are far too exacting. Supposing, for instance, and do not be
angry at what I am going to say----"

"Well."

"Supposing the assertion to be really true?"

"A son ought not to submit to such a stain on his father's honor."

"_Ma foi!_ we live in times when there is much to which we must submit."

"That is precisely the fault of the age."

"And do you undertake to reform it?"

"Yes, as far as I am personally concerned."

"Well, you are indeed exacting, my dear fellow!"

"Yes, I own it."

"Are you quite impervious to good advice?"

"Not when it comes from a friend."

"And do you account me that title?"

"Certainly I do."

"Well, then, before going to Beauchamp with your witnesses, seek further
information on the subject."

"From whom?"

"From Haydée."

"Why, what can be the use of mixing a woman up in the affair?--what can
she do in it?"

"She can declare to you, for example, that your father had no hand
whatever in the defeat and death of the vizier; or if by chance he had,
indeed, the misfortune to----"

"I have told you, my dear count, that I would not for one moment admit
of such a proposition."

"You reject this means of information, then?"

"I do--most decidedly."

"Then let me offer one more word of advice."

"Do so, then, but let it be the last."

"You do not wish to hear it, perhaps?"

"On the contrary, I request it."

"Do not take any witnesses with you when you go to Beauchamp--visit him
alone."

"That would be contrary to all custom."

"Your case is not an ordinary one."

"And what is your reason for advising me to go alone?"

"Because then the affair will rest between you and Beauchamp."

"Explain yourself."

"I will do so. If Beauchamp be disposed to retract, you ought at least
to give him the opportunity of doing it of his own free will,--the
satisfaction to you will be the same. If, on the contrary, he refuses to
do so, it will then be quite time enough to admit two strangers into
your secret."

"They will not be strangers, they will be friends."

"Ah, but the friends of today are the enemies of tomorrow; Beauchamp,
for instance."

"So you recommend----"

"I recommend you to be prudent."

"Then you advise me to go alone to Beauchamp?"

"I do, and I will tell you why. When you wish to obtain some concession
from a man's self-love, you must avoid even the appearance of wishing to
wound it."

"I believe you are right."

"I am glad of it."

"Then I will go alone."

"Go; but you would do better still by not going at all."

"That is impossible."

"Do so, then; it will be a wiser plan than the first which you
proposed."

"But if, in spite of all my precautions, I am at last obliged to fight,
will you not be my second?"

"My dear viscount," said Monte Cristo gravely, "you must have seen
before today that at all times and in all places I have been at your
disposal, but the service which you have just demanded of me is one
which it is out of my power to render you."

"Why?"

"Perhaps you may know at some future period, and in the mean time I
request you to excuse my declining to put you in possession of my
reasons."

"Well, I will have Franz and Château-Renaud; they will be the very men
for it."

"Do so, then."

"But if I do fight, you will surely not object to giving me a lesson or
two in shooting and fencing?"

"That, too, is impossible."

"What a singular being you are!--you will not interfere in anything."

"You are right--that is the principle on which I wish to act."

"We will say no more about it, then. Good-bye, count." Morcerf took his
hat, and left the room. He found his carriage at the door, and doing his
utmost to restrain his anger he went at once to find Beauchamp, who was
in his office. It was a gloomy, dusty-looking apartment, such as
journalists' offices have always been from time immemorial. The servant
announced M. Albert de Morcerf. Beauchamp repeated the name to himself,
as though he could scarcely believe that he had heard aright, and then
gave orders for him to be admitted. Albert entered. Beauchamp uttered an
exclamation of surprise on seeing his friend leap over and trample under
foot all the newspapers which were strewed about the room. "This way,
this way, my dear Albert!" said he, holding out his hand to the young
man. "Are you out of your senses, or do you come peaceably to take
breakfast with me? Try and find a seat--there is one by that geranium,
which is the only thing in the room to remind me that there are other
leaves in the world besides leaves of paper."

"Beauchamp," said Albert, "it is of your journal that I come to speak."

"Indeed? What do you wish to say about it?"

"I desire that a statement contained in it should be rectified."
