
"From Yanina?"

"Yes."

"Impossible!"

"Here is my passport; examine the visa--Geneva, Milan, Venice, Trieste,
Delvino, Yanina. Will you believe the government of a republic, a
kingdom, and an empire?" Albert cast his eyes on the passport, then
raised them in astonishment to Beauchamp. "You have been to Yanina?"
said he.

"Albert, had you been a stranger, a foreigner, a simple lord, like that
Englishman who came to demand satisfaction three or four months since,
and whom I killed to get rid of, I should not have taken this trouble;
but I thought this mark of consideration due to you. I took a week to
go, another to return, four days of quarantine, and forty-eight hours to
stay there; that makes three weeks. I returned last night, and here I
am."

"What circumlocution! How long you are before you tell me what I most
wish to know?"

"Because, in truth, Albert----"

"You hesitate?"

"Yes,--I fear."

"You fear to acknowledge that your correspondent has deceived you? Oh,
no self-love, Beauchamp. Acknowledge it, Beauchamp; your courage cannot
be doubted."

"Not so," murmured the journalist; "on the contrary----"

Albert turned frightfully pale; he endeavored to speak, but the words
died on his lips. "My friend," said Beauchamp, in the most affectionate
tone, "I should gladly make an apology; but, alas, ----"

"But what?"

"The paragraph was correct, my friend."

"What? That French officer----"

"Yes."

"Fernand?"

"Yes."

"The traitor who surrendered the castle of the man in whose service he
was----"

"Pardon me, my friend, that man was your father!" Albert advanced
furiously towards Beauchamp, but the latter restrained him more by a
mild look than by his extended hand.

"My friend," said he, "here is a proof of it."


Albert opened the paper, it was an attestation of four notable
inhabitants of Yanina, proving that Colonel Fernand Mondego, in the
service of Ali Tepelini, had surrendered the castle for two million
crowns. The signatures were perfectly legal. Albert tottered and fell
overpowered in a chair. It could no longer be doubted; the family name
was fully given. After a moment's mournful silence, his heart
overflowed, and he gave way to a flood of tears. Beauchamp, who had
watched with sincere pity the young man's paroxysm of grief, approached
him. "Now, Albert," said he, "you understand me--do you not? I wished to
see all, and to judge of everything for myself, hoping the explanation
would be in your father's favor, and that I might do him justice. But,
on the contrary, the particulars which are given prove that Fernand
Mondego, raised by Ali Pasha to the rank of governor-general, is no
other than Count Fernand of Morcerf; then, recollecting the honor you
had done me, in admitting me to your friendship, I hastened to you."

Albert, still extended on the chair, covered his face with both hands,
as if to prevent the light from reaching him. "I hastened to you,"
continued Beauchamp, "to tell you, Albert, that in this changing age,
the faults of a father cannot revert upon his children. Few have passed
through this revolutionary period, in the midst of which we were born,
without some stain of infamy or blood to soil the uniform of the
soldier, or the gown of the magistrate. Now I have these proofs, Albert,
and I am in your confidence, no human power can force me to a duel which
your own conscience would reproach you with as criminal, but I come to
offer you what you can no longer demand of me. Do you wish these proofs,
these attestations, which I alone possess, to be destroyed? Do you wish
this frightful secret to remain with us? Confided to me, it shall never
escape my lips; say, Albert, my friend, do you wish it?"

Albert threw himself on Beauchamp's neck. "Ah, noble fellow!" cried he.

"Take these," said Beauchamp, presenting the papers to Albert.

Albert seized them with a convulsive hand, tore them in pieces, and
trembling lest the least vestige should escape and one day appear to
confront him, he approached the wax-light, always kept burning for
cigars, and burned every fragment. "Dear, excellent friend," murmured
Albert, still burning the papers.

"Let all be forgotten as a sorrowful dream," said Beauchamp; "let it
vanish as the last sparks from the blackened paper, and disappear as the
smoke from those silent ashes."

"Yes, yes," said Albert, "and may there remain only the eternal
friendship which I promised to my deliverer, which shall be transmitted
to our children's children, and shall always remind me that I owe my
life and the honor of my name to you,--for had this been known, oh,
Beauchamp, I should have destroyed myself; or,--no, my poor mother! I
could not have killed her by the same blow,--I should have fled from my
country."

"Dear Albert," said Beauchamp. But this sudden and factitious joy soon
forsook the young man, and was succeeded by a still greater grief.

"Well," said Beauchamp, "what still oppresses you, my friend?"


"I am broken-hearted," said Albert. "Listen, Beauchamp! I cannot thus,
in a moment relinquish the respect, the confidence, and pride with which
a father's untarnished name inspires a son. Oh, Beauchamp, Beauchamp,
how shall I now approach mine? Shall I draw back my forehead from his
embrace, or withhold my hand from his? I am the most wretched of men.
Ah, my mother, my poor mother!" said Albert, gazing through his tears at
his mother's portrait; "if you know this, how much must you suffer!"

"Come," said Beauchamp, taking both his hands, "take courage, my
friend."

"But how came that first note to be inserted in your journal? Some
unknown enemy--an invisible foe--has done this."

"The more must you fortify yourself, Albert. Let no trace of emotion be
visible on your countenance, bear your grief as the cloud bears within
it ruin and death--a fatal secret, known only when the storm bursts. Go,
my friend, reserve your strength for the moment when the crash shall
come."


"You think, then, all is not over yet?" said Albert, horror-stricken.

"I think nothing, my friend; but all things are possible. By the way----
"

"What?" said Albert, seeing that Beauchamp hesitated.

"Are you going to marry Mademoiselle Danglars?"

"Why do you ask me now?"

"Because the rupture or fulfilment of this engagement is connected with
the person of whom we were speaking."

"How?" said Albert, whose brow reddened; "you think M. Danglars----"

"I ask you only how your engagement stands? Pray put no construction on
my words I do not mean they should convey, and give them no undue
weight."

"No." said Albert, "the engagement is broken off."

"Well," said Beauchamp. Then, seeing the young man was about to relapse
into melancholy, "Let us go out, Albert," said he; "a ride in the wood
in the phaeton, or on horseback, will refresh you; we will then return
to breakfast, and you shall attend to your affairs, and I to mine."

"Willingly," said Albert; "but let us walk. I think a little exertion
would do me good." The two friends walked out on the fortress. When
arrived at the Madeleine,--"Since we are out," said Beauchamp, "let us
call on M. de Monte Cristo; he is admirably adapted to revive one's
spirits, because he never interrogates, and in my opinion those who ask
no questions are the best comforters."

"Gladly," said Albert; "I love him--let us call."



Chapter 85. The Journey

Monte Cristo uttered a joyful exclamation on seeing the young men
together. "Ah, ha!" said he, "I hope all is over, explained and
settled."

"Yes," said Beauchamp; "the absurd reports have died away, and should
they be renewed, I would be the first to oppose them; so let us speak no
more of it."

"Albert will tell you," replied the count "that I gave him the same
advice. Look," added he. "I am finishing the most execrable morning's
work."

"What is it?" said Albert; "arranging your papers, apparently."

"My papers, thank God, no,--my papers are all in capital order, because
I have none; but M. Cavalcanti's."

"M. Cavalcanti's?" asked Beauchamp.

