legs than on the four legs of a cab-horse. He had therefore set off at a
furious rate from the Rue Meslay, and was hastening with rapid strides
in the direction of the Faubourg Saint-Honoré.

Morrel advanced with a firm, manly tread, and poor Barrois followed him
as he best might. Morrel was only thirty-one, Barrois was sixty years of
age; Morrel was deeply in love, and Barrois was dying with heat and
exertion. These two men, thus opposed in age and interests, resembled
two parts of a triangle, presenting the extremes of separation, yet
nevertheless possessing their point of union. This point of union was
Noirtier, and it was he who had just sent for Morrel, with the request
that the latter would lose no time in coming to him--a command which
Morrel obeyed to the letter, to the great discomfiture of Barrois. On
arriving at the house, Morrel was not even out of breath, for love lends
wings to our desires; but Barrois, who had long forgotten what it was to
love, was sorely fatigued by the expedition he had been constrained to
use.

The old servant introduced Morrel by a private entrance, closed the door
of the study, and soon the rustling of a dress announced the arrival of
Valentine. She looked marvellously beautiful in her deep mourning dress,
and Morrel experienced such intense delight in gazing upon her that he
felt as if he could almost have dispensed with the conversation of her
grandfather. But the easy-chair of the old man was heard rolling along
the floor, and he soon made his appearance in the room. Noirtier
acknowledged by a look of extreme kindness and benevolence the thanks
which Morrel lavished on him for his timely intervention on behalf of
Valentine and himself--an intervention which had saved them from
despair. Morrel then cast on the invalid an interrogative look as to the
new favor which he designed to bestow on him. Valentine was sitting at a
little distance from them, timidly awaiting the moment when she should
be obliged to speak. Noirtier fixed his eyes on her. "Am I to say what
you told me?" asked Valentine. Noirtier made a sign that she was to do
so.

"Monsieur Morrel," said Valentine to the young man, who was regarding
her with the most intense interest, "my grandfather, M. Noirtier, had a
thousand things to say, which he told me three days ago; and now, he has
sent for you, that I may repeat them to you. I will repeat them, then;
and since he has chosen me as his interpreter, I will be faithful to the
trust, and will not alter a word of his intentions."

"Oh, I am listening with the greatest impatience," replied the young
man; "speak, I beg of you." Valentine cast down her eyes; this was a
good omen for Morrel, for he knew that nothing but happiness could have
the power of thus overcoming Valentine. "My grandfather intends leaving
this house," said she, "and Barrois is looking out for suitable
apartments for him in another."

"But you, Mademoiselle de Villefort,--you, who are necessary to M.
Noirtier's happiness----"

"I?" interrupted Valentine; "I shall not leave my grandfather,--that is
an understood thing between us. My apartment will be close to his. Now,
M. de Villefort must either give his consent to this plan or his
refusal; in the first case, I shall leave directly, and in the second, I
shall wait till I am of age, which will be in about ten months. Then I
shall be free, I shall have an independent fortune, and"--

"And what?" demanded Morrel.

"And with my grandfather's consent I shall fulfil the promise which I
have made you." Valentine pronounced these last few words in such a low
tone, that nothing but Morrel's intense interest in what she was saying
could have enabled him to hear them. "Have I not explained your wishes,
grandpapa?" said Valentine, addressing Noirtier. "Yes," looked the old
man.--"Once under my grandfather's roof, M. Morrel can visit me in the
presence of my good and worthy protector, if we still feel that the
union we contemplated will be likely to insure our future comfort and
happiness; in that case I shall expect M. Morrel to come and claim me at
my own hands. But, alas, I have heard it said that hearts inflamed by
obstacles to their desire grew cold in time of security; I trust we
shall never find it so in our experience!"

"Oh," cried Morrel, almost tempted to throw himself on his knees before
Noirtier and Valentine, and to adore them as two superior beings, "what
have I ever done in my life to merit such unbounded happiness?"

"Until that time," continued the young girl in a calm and self-possessed
tone of voice, "we will conform to circumstances, and be guided by the
wishes of our friends, so long as those wishes do not tend finally to
separate us; in a word, and I repeat it, because it expresses all I wish
to convey,--we will wait."

"And I swear to make all the sacrifices which this word imposes, sir,"
said Morrel, "not only with resignation, but with cheerfulness."

"Therefore," continued Valentine, looking playfully at Maximilian, "no
more inconsiderate actions--no more rash projects; for you surely would
not wish to compromise one who from this day regards herself as
destined, honorably and happily, to bear your name?"

Morrel looked obedience to her commands. Noirtier regarded the lovers
with a look of ineffable tenderness, while Barrois, who had remained in
the room in the character of a man privileged to know everything that
passed, smiled on the youthful couple as he wiped the perspiration from
his bald forehead. "How hot you look, my good Barrois," said Valentine.

"Ah, I have been running very fast, mademoiselle, but I must do M.
Morrel the justice to say that he ran still faster." Noirtier directed
their attention to a waiter, on which was placed a decanter containing
lemonade and a glass. The decanter was nearly full, with the exception
of a little, which had been already drunk by M. Noirtier.

"Come, Barrois," said the young girl, "take some of this lemonade; I see
you are coveting a good draught of it."

"The fact is, mademoiselle," said Barrois, "I am dying with thirst, and
since you are so kind as to offer it me, I cannot say I should at all
object to drinking your health in a glass of it."

"Take some, then, and come back immediately." Barrois took away the
waiter, and hardly was he outside the door, which in his haste he forgot
to shut, than they saw him throw back his head and empty to the very
dregs the glass which Valentine had filled. Valentine and Morrel were
exchanging their adieux in the presence of Noirtier when a ring was
heard at the door-bell. It was the signal of a visit. Valentine looked
at her watch.

"It is past noon," said she, "and today is Saturday; I dare say it is
the doctor, grandpapa." Noirtier looked his conviction that she was
right in her supposition. "He will come in here, and M. Morrel had
better go,--do you not think so, grandpapa?"

"Yes," signed the old man.

"Barrois," cried Valentine, "Barrois!"


"I am coming, mademoiselle," replied he.

"Barrois will open the door for you," said Valentine, addressing Morrel.
"And now remember one thing, Monsieur Officer, that my grandfather
commands you not to take any rash or ill-advised step which would be
likely to compromise our happiness."

"I promised him to wait," replied Morrel; "and I will wait."

At this moment Barrois entered. "Who rang?" asked Valentine.

"Doctor d'Avrigny," said Barrois, staggering as if he would fall.

"What is the matter, Barrois?" said Valentine. The old man did not
answer, but looked at his master with wild staring eyes, while with his
cramped hand he grasped a piece of furniture to enable him to stand
upright. "He is going to fall!" cried Morrel. The rigors which had
attacked Barrois gradually increased, the features of the face became
quite altered, and the convulsive movement of the muscles appeared to
indicate the approach of a most serious nervous disorder. Noirtier,
seeing Barrois in this pitiable condition, showed by his looks all the
various emotions of sorrow and sympathy which can animate the heart of
man. Barrois made some steps towards his master.

"Ah, sir," said he, "tell me what is the matter with me. I am suffering-
-I cannot see. A thousand fiery darts are piercing my brain. Ah, don't
touch me, pray don't." By this time his haggard eyes had the appearance
of being ready to start from their sockets; his head fell back, and the
lower extremities of the body began to stiffen. Valentine uttered a cry
of horror; Morrel took her in his arms, as if to defend her from some
unknown danger. "M. d'Avrigny, M. d'Avrigny," cried she, in a stifled
voice. "Help, help!" Barrois turned round and with a great effort
stumbled a few steps, then fell at the feet of Noirtier, and resting his
hand on the knee of the invalid, exclaimed, "My master, my good master!"
At this moment M. de Villefort, attracted by the noise, appeared on the
threshold. Morrel relaxed his hold of Valentine, and retreating to a
distant corner of the room remained half hidden behind a curtain. Pale
as if he had been gazing on a serpent, he fixed his terrified eye on the
agonized sufferer.

Noirtier, burning with impatience and terror, was in despair at his
utter inability to help his old domestic, whom he regarded more in the
light of a friend than a servant. One might by the fearful swelling of
the veins of his forehead and the contraction of the muscles round the
eye, trace the terrible conflict which was going on between the living
energetic mind and the inanimate and helpless body. Barrois, his
features convulsed, his eyes suffused with blood, and his head thrown
back, was lying at full length, beating the floor with his hands, while
his legs had become so stiff, that they looked as if they would break
rather than bend. A slight appearance of foam was visible around the
mouth, and he breathed painfully, and with extreme difficulty.

Villefort seemed stupefied with astonishment, and remained gazing
intently on the scene before him without uttering a word. He had not
seen Morrel. After a moment of dumb contemplation, during which his face
became pale and his hair seemed to stand on end, he sprang towards the
door, crying out, "Doctor, doctor! come instantly, pray come!"

"Madame, madame!" cried Valentine, calling her step-mother, and running
upstairs to meet her; "come quick, quick!--and bring your bottle of
smelling-salts with you."

"What is the matter?" said Madame de Villefort in a harsh and
constrained tone.

"Oh, come, come!"

"But where is the doctor?" exclaimed Villefort; "where is he?" Madame de
Villefort now deliberately descended the staircase. In one hand she held
her handkerchief, with which she appeared to be wiping her face, and in
the other a bottle of English smelling-salts. Her first look on entering
