so firm a tone that the color mounted to Valentine's cheeks. The timid
girl could not understand that vigorous nature which appeared to have
none of the timidities of woman.

"At any rate," said she, "since I am to be married whether I will or
not, I ought to be thankful to Providence for having released me from my
engagement with M. Albert de Morcerf, or I should this day have been the
wife of a dishonored man."

"It is true," said the baroness, with that strange simplicity sometimes
met with among fashionable ladies, and of which plebeian intercourse can
never entirely deprive them,--"it is very true that had not the Morcerfs
hesitated, my daughter would have married Monsieur Albert. The general
depended much on it; he even came to force M. Danglars. We have had a
narrow escape."

"But," said Valentine, timidly, "does all the father's shame revert upon
the son? Monsieur Albert appears to me quite innocent of the treason
charged against the general."

"Excuse me," said the implacable young girl, "Monsieur Albert claims and
well deserves his share. It appears that after having challenged M. de
Monte Cristo at the Opera yesterday, he apologized on the ground today."

"Impossible," said Madame de Villefort.

"Ah, my dear friend," said Madame Danglars, with the same simplicity we
before noticed, "it is a fact. I heard it from M. Debray, who was
present at the explanation." Valentine also knew the truth, but she did
not answer. A single word had reminded her that Morrel was expecting her
in M. Noirtier's room. Deeply engaged with a sort of inward
contemplation, Valentine had ceased for a moment to join in the
conversation. She would, indeed, have found it impossible to repeat what
had been said the last few minutes, when suddenly Madame Danglars' hand,
pressed on her arm, aroused her from her lethargy.

"What is it?" said she, starting at Madame Danglars' touch as she would
have done from an electric shock.

"It is, my dear Valentine," said the baroness, "that you are, doubtless,
suffering."


"I?" said the young girl, passing her hand across her burning forehead.

"Yes, look at yourself in that glass; you have turned pale and then red
successively, three or four times in one minute."

"Indeed," cried Eugénie, "you are very pale!"

"Oh, do not be alarmed; I have been so for many days." Artless as she
was, the young girl knew that this was an opportunity to leave, and
besides, Madame de Villefort came to her assistance. "Retire,
Valentine," said she; "you are really suffering, and these ladies will
excuse you; drink a glass of pure water, it will restore you." Valentine
kissed Eugénie, bowed to Madame Danglars, who had already risen to take
her leave, and went out. "That poor child," said Madame de Villefort
when Valentine was gone, "she makes me very uneasy, and I should not be
astonished if she had some serious illness."

Meanwhile, Valentine, in a sort of excitement which she could not quite
understand, had crossed Edward's room without noticing some trick of the
child, and through her own had reached the little staircase. She was
within three steps of the bottom; she already heard Morrel's voice, when
suddenly a cloud passed over her eyes, her stiffened foot missed the
step, her hands had no power to hold the baluster, and falling against
the wall she lost her balance wholly and toppled to the floor. Morrel
bounded to the door, opened it, and found Valentine stretched out at the
bottom of the stairs. Quick as a flash, he raised her in his arms and
placed her in a chair. Valentine opened her eyes.

"Oh, what a clumsy thing I am," said she with feverish volubility; "I
don't know my way. I forgot there were three more steps before the
landing."

"You have hurt yourself, perhaps," said Morrel. "What can I do for you,
Valentine?" Valentine looked around her; she saw the deepest terror
depicted in Noirtier's eyes. "Don't worry, dear grandpapa," said she,
endeavoring to smile; "it is nothing--it is nothing; I was giddy, that
is all."

"Another attack of giddiness," said Morrel, clasping his hands. "Oh,
attend to it, Valentine, I entreat you."

"But no," said Valentine,--"no, I tell you it is all past, and it was
nothing. Now, let me tell you some news; Eugénie is to be married in a
week, and in three days there is to be a grand feast, a betrothal
festival. We are all invited, my father, Madame de Villefort, and I--at
least, I understood it so."

"When will it be our turn to think of these things? Oh, Valentine, you
who have so much influence over your grandpapa, try to make him answer--
Soon."

"And do you," said Valentine, "depend on me to stimulate the tardiness
and arouse the memory of grandpapa?"

"Yes," cried Morrel, "make haste. So long as you are not mine,
Valentine, I shall always think I may lose you."

"Oh," replied Valentine with a convulsive movement, "oh, indeed,
Maximilian, you are too timid for an officer, for a soldier who, they
say, never knows fear. Ha, ha, ha!"

She burst into a forced and melancholy laugh, her arms stiffened and
twisted, her head fell back on her chair, and she remained motionless.
The cry of terror which was stopped on Noirtier's lips, seemed to start
from his eyes. Morrel understood it; he knew he must call assistance.
The young man rang the bell violently; the housemaid who had been in
Mademoiselle Valentine's room, and the servant who had replaced Barrois,
ran in at the same moment. Valentine was so pale, so cold, so inanimate
that without listening to what was said to them they were seized with
the fear which pervaded that house, and they flew into the passage
crying for help. Madame Danglars and Eugénie were going out at that
moment; they heard the cause of the disturbance.

"I told you so!" exclaimed Madame de Villefort. "Poor child!"



Chapter 94. Maximilian's Avowal

At the same moment M. de Villefort's voice was heard calling from his
study, "What is the matter?" Morrel looked at Noirtier who had recovered
his self-command, and with a glance indicated the closet where once
before under somewhat similar circumstances, he had taken refuge. He had
only time to get his hat and throw himself breathless into the closet
when the procureur's footstep was heard in the passage. Villefort sprang
into the room, ran to Valentine, and took her in his arms. "A physician,
a physician,--M. d'Avrigny!" cried Villefort; "or rather I will go for
him myself." He flew from the apartment, and Morrel at the same moment
darted out at the other door. He had been struck to the heart by a
frightful recollection--the conversation he had heard between the doctor
and Villefort the night of Madame de Saint-Méran's death, recurred to
him; these symptoms, to a less alarming extent, were the same which had
preceded the death of Barrois. At the same time Monte Cristo's voice
seemed to resound in his ear with the words he had heard only two hours
before, "Whatever you want, Morrel, come to me; I have great power."
More rapidly than thought, he darted down the Rue Matignon, and thence
to the Avenue des Champs-Élysées.

Meanwhile M. de Villefort arrived in a hired cabriolet at M. d'Avrigny's
door. He rang so violently that the porter was alarmed. Villefort ran
upstairs without saying a word. The porter knew him, and let him pass,
only calling to him, "In his study, Monsieur Procureur--in his study!"
Villefort pushed, or rather forced, the door open.

"Ah," said the doctor, "is it you?"

"Yes," said Villefort, closing the door after him, "it is I, who am come
in my turn to ask you if we are quite alone. Doctor, my house is
accursed!"

"What?" said the latter with apparent coolness, but with deep emotion,
"have you another invalid?"

"Yes, doctor," cried Villefort, clutching his hair, "yes!"

D'Avrigny's look implied, "I told you it would be so." Then he slowly
uttered these words, "Who is now dying in your house? What new victim is
going to accuse you of weakness before God?" A mournful sob burst from
Villefort's heart; he approached the doctor, and seizing his arm,--
"Valentine," said he, "it is Valentine's turn!"


"Your daughter!" cried d'Avrigny with grief and surprise.

"You see you were deceived," murmured the magistrate; "come and see her,
and on her bed of agony entreat her pardon for having suspected her."

"Each time you have applied to me," said the doctor, "it has been too
late; still I will go. But let us make haste, sir; with the enemies you
have to do with there is no time to be lost."

"Oh, this time, doctor, you shall not have to reproach me with weakness.
This time I will know the assassin, and will pursue him."

"Let us try first to save the victim before we think of revenging her,"
said d'Avrigny. "Come." The same cabriolet which had brought Villefort
took them back at full speed, and at this moment Morrel rapped at Monte
Cristo's door. The count was in his study and was reading with an angry
look something which Bertuccio had brought in haste. Hearing the name of
Morrel, who had left him only two hours before, the count raised his
head, arose, and sprang to meet him. "What is the matter, Maximilian?"
asked he; "you are pale, and the perspiration rolls from your forehead."
Morrel fell into a chair. "Yes," said he, "I came quickly; I wanted to
speak to you."

"Are all your family well?" asked the count, with an affectionate
benevolence, whose sincerity no one could for a moment doubt.

"Thank you, count--thank you," said the young man, evidently embarrassed
how to begin the conversation; "yes, everyone in my family is well."

"So much the better; yet you have something to tell me?" replied the
count with increased anxiety.

"Yes," said Morrel, "it is true; I have but now left a house where death
has just entered, to run to you."

