"Take all, then--take all, I tell you, and kill me!"

"Come, come, calm yourself. You will excite your blood, and that would
produce an appetite it would require a million a day to satisfy. Be more
economical."

"But when I have no more money left to pay you?" asked the infuriated
Danglars.

"Then you must suffer hunger."

"Suffer hunger?" said Danglars, becoming pale.

"Most likely," replied Vampa coolly.

"But you say you do not wish to kill me?"

"No."

"And yet you will let me perish with hunger?"

"Ah, that is a different thing."

"Well, then, wretches," cried Danglars, "I will defy your infamous
calculations--I would rather die at once! You may torture, torment, kill
me, but you shall not have my signature again!"

"As your excellency pleases," said Vampa, as he left the cell. Danglars,
raving, threw himself on the goat-skin. Who could these men be? Who was
the invisible chief? What could be his intentions towards him? And why,
when everyone else was allowed to be ransomed, might he not also be? Oh,
yes; certainly a speedy, violent death would be a fine means of
deceiving these remorseless enemies, who appeared to pursue him with
such incomprehensible vengeance. But to die? For the first time in his
life, Danglars contemplated death with a mixture of dread and desire;
the time had come when the implacable spectre, which exists in the mind
of every human creature, arrested his attention and called out with
every pulsation of his heart, "Thou shalt die!"

Danglars resembled a timid animal excited in the chase; first it flies,
then despairs, and at last, by the very force of desperation, sometimes
succeeds in eluding its pursuers. Danglars meditated an escape; but the
walls were solid rock, a man was sitting reading at the only outlet to
the cell, and behind that man shapes armed with guns continually passed.
His resolution not to sign lasted two days, after which he offered a
million for some food. They sent him a magnificent supper, and took his
million.

From this time the prisoner resolved to suffer no longer, but to have
everything he wanted. At the end of twelve days, after having made a
splendid dinner, he reckoned his accounts, and found that he had only
50,000 francs left. Then a strange reaction took place; he who had just
abandoned 5,000,000 endeavored to save the 50,000 francs he had left,
and sooner than give them up he resolved to enter again upon a life of
privation--he was deluded by the hopefulness that is a premonition of
madness. He who for so long a time had forgotten God, began to think
that miracles were possible--that the accursed cavern might be
discovered by the officers of the Papal States, who would release him;
that then he would have 50,000 remaining, which would be sufficient to
save him from starvation; and finally he prayed that this sum might be
preserved to him, and as he prayed he wept. Three days passed thus,
during which his prayers were frequent, if not heartfelt. Sometimes he
was delirious, and fancied he saw an old man stretched on a pallet; he,
also, was dying of hunger.

On the fourth, he was no longer a man, but a living corpse. He had
picked up every crumb that had been left from his former meals, and was
beginning to eat the matting which covered the floor of his cell. Then
he entreated Peppino, as he would a guardian angel, to give him food; he
offered him 1,000 francs for a mouthful of bread. But Peppino did not
answer. On the fifth day he dragged himself to the door of the cell.

"Are you not a Christian?" he said, falling on his knees. "Do you wish
to assassinate a man who, in the eyes of heaven, is a brother? Oh, my
former friends, my former friends!" he murmured, and fell with his face
to the ground. Then rising in despair, he exclaimed, "The chief, the
chief!"

"Here I am," said Vampa, instantly appearing; "what do you want?"

"Take my last gold," muttered Danglars, holding out his pocket-book,
"and let me live here; I ask no more for liberty--I only ask to live!"

"Then you suffer a great deal?"

"Oh, yes, yes, cruelly!"

"Still, there have been men who suffered more than you."

"I do not think so."

"Yes; those who have died of hunger."

Danglars thought of the old man whom, in his hours of delirium, he had
seen groaning on his bed. He struck his forehead on the ground and
groaned. "Yes," he said, "there have been some who have suffered more
than I have, but then they must have been martyrs at least."

"Do you repent?" asked a deep, solemn voice, which caused Danglars' hair
to stand on end. His feeble eyes endeavored to distinguish objects, and
behind the bandit he saw a man enveloped in a cloak, half lost in the
shadow of a stone column.

"Of what must I repent?" stammered Danglars.

"Of the evil you have done," said the voice.

"Oh, yes; oh, yes, I do indeed repent." And he struck his breast with
his emaciated fist.

"Then I forgive you," said the man, dropping his cloak, and advancing to
the light.

"The Count of Monte Cristo!" said Danglars, more pale from terror than
he had been just before from hunger and misery.

"You are mistaken--I am not the Count of Monte Cristo."

"Then who are you?"


"I am he whom you sold and dishonored--I am he whose betrothed you
prostituted--I am he upon whom you trampled that you might raise
yourself to fortune--I am he whose father you condemned to die of
hunger--I am he whom you also condemned to starvation, and who yet
forgives you, because he hopes to be forgiven--I am Edmond Dantès!"

Danglars uttered a cry, and fell prostrate.

"Rise," said the count, "your life is safe; the same good fortune has
not happened to your accomplices--one is mad, the other dead. Keep the
50,000 francs you have left--I give them to you. The 5,000,000 you stole
from the hospitals has been restored to them by an unknown hand. And now
eat and drink; I will entertain you tonight. Vampa, when this man is
satisfied, let him be free."

Danglars remained prostrate while the count withdrew; when he raised his
head he saw disappearing down the passage nothing but a shadow, before
which the bandits bowed.

According to the count's directions, Danglars was waited on by Vampa,
who brought him the best wine and fruits of Italy; then, having
conducted him to the road, and pointed to the post-chaise, left him
leaning against a tree. He remained there all night, not knowing where
he was. When daylight dawned he saw that he was near a stream; he was
thirsty, and dragged himself towards it. As he stooped down to drink, he
saw that his hair had become entirely white.



Chapter 117. The Fifth of October

It was about six o'clock in the evening; an opal-colored light, through
which an autumnal sun shed its golden rays, descended on the blue ocean.
The heat of the day had gradually decreased, and a light breeze arose,
seeming like the respiration of nature on awakening from the burning
siesta of the south. A delicious zephyr played along the coasts of the
Mediterranean, and wafted from shore to shore the sweet perfume of
plants, mingled with the fresh smell of the sea.

A light yacht, chaste and elegant in its form, was gliding amidst the
first dews of night over the immense lake, extending from Gibraltar to
the Dardanelles, and from Tunis to Venice. The vessel resembled a swan
with its wings opened towards the wind, gliding on the water. It
advanced swiftly and gracefully, leaving behind it a glittering stretch
of foam. By degrees the sun disappeared behind the western horizon; but
as though to prove the truth of the fanciful ideas in heathen mythology,
its indiscreet rays reappeared on the summit of every wave, as if the
god of fire had just sunk upon the bosom of Amphitrite, who in vain
endeavored to hide her lover beneath her azure mantle.

The yacht moved rapidly on, though there did not appear to be sufficient
wind to ruffle the curls on the head of a young girl. Standing on the
prow was a tall man, of a dark complexion, who saw with dilating eyes
that they were approaching a dark mass of land in the shape of a cone,
which rose from the midst of the waves like the hat of a Catalan.

"Is that Monte Cristo?" asked the traveller, to whose orders the yacht
was for the time submitted, in a melancholy voice.

"Yes, your excellency," said the captain, "we have reached it."

"We have reached it!" repeated the traveller in an accent of
indescribable sadness. Then he added, in a low tone, "Yes; that is the
haven." And then he again plunged into a train of thought, the character
of which was better revealed by a sad smile, than it would have been by
tears. A few minutes afterwards a flash of light, which was extinguished
instantly, was seen on the land, and the sound of firearms reached the
yacht.

"Your excellency," said the captain, "that was the land signal, will you
answer yourself?"

"What signal?"

The captain pointed towards the island, up the side of which ascended a
volume of smoke, increasing as it rose.

"Ah, yes," he said, as if awaking from a dream. "Give it to me."

