yacht that was expected at Bastia, at Porto-Ferrajo, or at Civita
Vecchia, has not arrived; no one knows what has become of it, but,
doubtless, it has struck on a rock and foundered. Now this rock it has
met has been a long and narrow boat, manned by six or eight men, who
have surprised and plundered it, some dark and stormy night, near some
desert and gloomy island, as bandits plunder a carriage in the recesses
of a forest."

"But," asked Franz, who lay wrapped in his cloak at the bottom of the
boat, "why do not those who have been plundered complain to the French,
Sardinian, or Tuscan governments?"

"Why?" said Gaetano with a smile.

"Yes, why?"

"Because, in the first place, they transfer from the vessel to their own
boat whatever they think worth taking, then they bind the crew hand and
foot, they attach to everyone's neck a four and twenty pound ball, a
large hole is chopped in the vessel's bottom, and then they leave her.
At the end of ten minutes the vessel begins to roll heavily and settle
down. First one gun'l goes under, then the other. Then they lift and
sink again, and both go under at once. All at once there's a noise like
a cannon--that's the air blowing up the deck. Soon the water rushes out
of the scupper-holes like a whale spouting, the vessel gives a last
groan, spins round and round, and disappears, forming a vast whirlpool
in the ocean, and then all is over, so that in five minutes nothing but
the eye of God can see the vessel where she lies at the bottom of the
sea. Do you understand now," said the captain, "why no complaints are
made to the government, and why the vessel never reaches port?"

It is probable that if Gaetano had related this previous to proposing
the expedition, Franz would have hesitated, but now that they had
started, he thought it would be cowardly to draw back. He was one of
those men who do not rashly court danger, but if danger presents itself,
combat it with the most unalterable coolness. Calm and resolute, he
treated any peril as he would an adversary in a duel,--calculated its
probable method of approach; retreated, if at all, as a point of
strategy and not from cowardice; was quick to see an opening for attack,
and won victory at a single thrust. "Bah!" said he, "I have travelled
through Sicily and Calabria--I have sailed two months in the
Archipelago, and yet I never saw even the shadow of a bandit or a
pirate."

"I did not tell your excellency this to deter you from your project,"
replied Gaetano, "but you questioned me, and I have answered; that's
all."

"Yes, and your conversation is most interesting; and as I wish to enjoy
it as long as possible, steer for Monte Cristo."

The wind blew strongly, the boat made six or seven knots an hour, and
they were rapidly reaching the end of their voyage. As they drew near
the island seemed to lift from the sea, and the air was so clear that
they could already distinguish the rocks heaped on one another, like
cannon balls in an arsenal, with green bushes and trees growing in the
crevices. As for the sailors, although they appeared perfectly tranquil
yet it was evident that they were on the alert, and that they carefully
watched the glassy surface over which they were sailing, and on which a
few fishing-boats, with their white sails, were alone visible. They were
within fifteen miles of Monte Cristo when the sun began to set behind
Corsica, whose mountains appeared against the sky, showing their rugged
peaks in bold relief; this mass of rock, like the giant Adamastor, rose
dead ahead, a formidable barrier, and intercepting the light that gilded
its massive peaks so that the voyagers were in shadow. Little by little
the shadow rose higher and seemed to drive before it the last rays of
the expiring day; at last the reflection rested on the summit of the
mountain, where it paused an instant, like the fiery crest of a volcano,
then gloom gradually covered the summit as it had covered the base, and
the island now only appeared to be a gray mountain that grew continually
darker; half an hour after, the night was quite dark.

Fortunately, the mariners were used to these latitudes, and knew every
rock in the Tuscan Archipelago; for in the midst of this obscurity Franz
was not without uneasiness--Corsica had long since disappeared, and
Monte Cristo itself was invisible; but the sailors seemed, like the
lynx, to see in the dark, and the pilot who steered did not evince the
slightest hesitation. An hour had passed since the sun had set, when
Franz fancied he saw, at a quarter of a mile to the left, a dark mass,
but he could not precisely make out what it was, and fearing to excite
the mirth of the sailors by mistaking a floating cloud for land, he
remained silent; suddenly a great light appeared on the strand; land
might resemble a cloud, but the fire was not a meteor. "What is this
light?" asked he.

"Hush!" said the captain; "it is a fire."

"But you told me the island was uninhabited?"

"I said there were no fixed habitations on it, but I said also that it
served sometimes as a harbor for smugglers."

"And for pirates?"

"And for pirates," returned Gaetano, repeating Franz's words. "It is for
that reason I have given orders to pass the island, for, as you see, the
fire is behind us."

"But this fire?" continued Franz. "It seems to me rather reassuring than
otherwise; men who did not wish to be seen would not light a fire."

"Oh, that goes for nothing," said Gaetano. "If you can guess the
position of the island in the darkness, you will see that the fire
cannot be seen from the side or from Pianosa, but only from the sea."

"You think, then, this fire indicates the presence of unpleasant
neighbors?"

"That is what we must find out," returned Gaetano, fixing his eyes on
this terrestrial star.

"How can you find out?"

"You shall see." Gaetano consulted with his companions, and after five
minutes' discussion a manœuvre was executed which caused the vessel to
tack about, they returned the way they had come, and in a few minutes
the fire disappeared, hidden by an elevation of the land. The pilot
again changed the course of the boat, which rapidly approached the
island, and was soon within fifty paces of it. Gaetano lowered the sail,
and the boat came to rest. All this was done in silence, and from the
moment that their course was changed not a word was spoken.

Gaetano, who had proposed the expedition, had taken all the
responsibility on himself; the four sailors fixed their eyes on him,
while they got out their oars and held themselves in readiness to row
away, which, thanks to the darkness, would not be difficult. As for
Franz, he examined his arms with the utmost coolness; he had two double-
barrelled guns and a rifle; he loaded them, looked at the priming, and
waited quietly. During this time the captain had thrown off his vest and
shirt, and secured his trousers round his waist; his feet were naked, so
he had no shoes and stockings to take off; after these preparations he
placed his finger on his lips, and lowering himself noiselessly into the
sea, swam towards the shore with such precaution that it was impossible
to hear the slightest sound; he could only be traced by the
phosphorescent line in his wake. This track soon disappeared; it was
evident that he had touched the shore. Everyone on board remained
motionless for half an hour, when the same luminous track was again
observed, and the swimmer was soon on board. "Well?" exclaimed Franz and
the sailors in unison.

"They are Spanish smugglers," said he; "they have with them two Corsican
bandits."

"And what are these Corsican bandits doing here with Spanish smugglers?"

"Alas," returned the captain with an accent of the most profound pity,
"we ought always to help one another. Very often the bandits are hard
pressed by gendarmes or carbineers; well, they see a vessel, and good
fellows like us on board, they come and demand hospitality of us; you
can't refuse help to a poor hunted devil; we receive them, and for
greater security we stand out to sea. This costs us nothing, and saves
the life, or at least the liberty, of a fellow-creature, who on the
first occasion returns the service by pointing out some safe spot where
we can land our goods without interruption."

"Ah!" said Franz, "then you are a smuggler occasionally, Gaetano?"

"Your excellency, we must live somehow," returned the other, smiling
impenetrably.

"Then you know the men who are now on Monte Cristo?"

"Oh, yes, we sailors are like freemasons, and recognize each other by
signs."

"And do you think we have nothing to fear if we land?"

"Nothing at all; smugglers are not thieves."

"But these two Corsican bandits?" said Franz, calculating the chances of
peril.

"It is not their fault that they are bandits, but that of the
authorities."

"How so?"

"Because they are pursued for having made a stiff, as if it was not in a
Corsican's nature to revenge himself."

"What do you mean by having made a stiff?--having assassinated a man?"
said Franz, continuing his investigation.

"I mean that they have killed an enemy, which is a very different
thing," returned the captain.

"Well," said the young man, "let us demand hospitality of these
smugglers and bandits. Do you think they will grant it?"

"Without doubt."

"How many are they?"

"Four, and the two bandits make six."

"Just our number, so that if they prove troublesome, we shall be able to
hold them in check; so, for the last time, steer to Monte Cristo."

"Yes, but your excellency will permit us to take all due precautions."

