double the Island of Elba. They were just abreast of Mareciana, and
beyond the flat but verdant Island of La Pianosa. The peak of Monte
Cristo reddened by the burning sun, was seen against the azure sky.
Dantès ordered the helmsman to put down his helm, in order to leave La
Pianosa to starboard, as he knew that he should shorten his course by
two or three knots. About five o'clock in the evening the island was
distinct, and everything on it was plainly perceptible, owing to that
clearness of the atmosphere peculiar to the light which the rays of the
sun cast at its setting.

Edmond gazed very earnestly at the mass of rocks which gave out all the
variety of twilight colors, from the brightest pink to the deepest blue;
and from time to time his cheeks flushed, his brow darkened, and a mist
passed over his eyes. Never did a gamester, whose whole fortune is
staked on one cast of the die, experience the anguish which Edmond felt
in his paroxysms of hope. Night came, and at ten o'clock they anchored.
_La Jeune Amélie_ was first at the rendezvous. In spite of his usual
command over himself, Dantès could not restrain his impetuosity. He was
the first to jump on shore; and had he dared, he would, like Lucius
Brutus, have "kissed his mother earth." It was dark, but at eleven
o'clock the moon rose in the midst of the ocean, whose every wave she
silvered, and then, "ascending high," played in floods of pale light on
the rocky hills of this second Pelion.

The island was familiar to the crew of _La Jeune Amélie_,--it was one of
her regular haunts. As to Dantès, he had passed it on his voyage to and
from the Levant, but never touched at it. He questioned Jacopo. "Where
shall we pass the night?" he inquired.

"Why, on board the tartan," replied the sailor.

"Should we not do better in the grottos?"

"What grottos?"

"Why, the grottos--caves of the island."

"I do not know of any grottos," replied Jacopo. The cold sweat sprang
forth on Dantès' brow.

"What, are there no grottos at Monte Cristo?" he asked.

"None."

For a moment Dantès was speechless; then he remembered that these caves
might have been filled up by some accident, or even stopped up, for the
sake of greater security, by Cardinal Spada. The point was, then, to
discover the hidden entrance. It was useless to search at night, and
Dantès therefore delayed all investigation until the morning. Besides, a
signal made half a league out at sea, and to which _La Jeune Amélie_
replied by a similar signal, indicated that the moment for business had
come. The boat that now arrived, assured by the answering signal that
all was well, soon came in sight, white and silent as a phantom, and
cast anchor within a cable's length of shore.

Then the landing began. Dantès reflected, as he worked, on the shout of
joy which, with a single word, he could evoke from all these men, if he
gave utterance to the one unchanging thought that pervaded his heart;
but, far from disclosing this precious secret, he almost feared that he
had already said too much, and by his restlessness and continual
questions, his minute observations and evident preoccupation, aroused
suspicions. Fortunately, as regarded this circumstance at least, his
painful past gave to his countenance an indelible sadness, and the
glimmerings of gayety seen beneath this cloud were indeed but
transitory.

No one had the slightest suspicion; and when next day, taking a fowling-
piece, powder, and shot, Dantès declared his intention to go and kill
some of the wild goats that were seen springing from rock to rock, his
wish was construed into a love of sport, or a desire for solitude.
However, Jacopo insisted on following him, and Dantès did not oppose
this, fearing if he did so that he might incur distrust. Scarcely,
however, had they gone a quarter of a league when, having killed a kid,
he begged Jacopo to take it to his comrades, and request them to cook
it, and when ready to let him know by firing a gun. This and some dried
fruits and a flask of Monte Pulciano, was the bill of fare. Dantès went
on, looking from time to time behind and around about him. Having
reached the summit of a rock, he saw, a thousand feet beneath him, his
companions, whom Jacopo had rejoined, and who were all busy preparing
the repast which Edmond's skill as a marksman had augmented with a
capital dish.

Edmond looked at them for a moment with the sad and gentle smile of a
man superior to his fellows. "In two hours' time," said he, "these
persons will depart richer by fifty piastres each, to go and risk their
lives again by endeavoring to gain fifty more; then they will return
with a fortune of six hundred francs, and waste this treasure in some
city with the pride of sultans and the insolence of nabobs. At this
moment hope makes me despise their riches, which seem to me
contemptible. Yet perchance tomorrow deception will so act on me, that I
shall, on compulsion, consider such a contemptible possession as the
utmost happiness. Oh, no!" exclaimed Edmond, "that will not be. The
wise, unerring Faria could not be mistaken in this one thing. Besides,
it were better to die than to continue to lead this low and wretched
life." Thus Dantès, who but three months before had no desire but
liberty had now not liberty enough, and panted for wealth. The cause was
not in Dantès, but in providence, who, while limiting the power of man,
has filled him with boundless desires.

Meanwhile, by a cleft between two walls of rock, following a path worn
by a torrent, and which, in all human probability, human foot had never
before trod, Dantès approached the spot where he supposed the grottos
must have existed. Keeping along the shore, and examining the smallest
object with serious attention, he thought he could trace, on certain
rocks, marks made by the hand of man.

Time, which encrusts all physical substances with its mossy mantle, as
it invests all things of the mind with forgetfulness, seemed to have
respected these signs, which apparently had been made with some degree
of regularity, and probably with a definite purpose. Occasionally the
marks were hidden under tufts of myrtle, which spread into large bushes
laden with blossoms, or beneath parasitical lichen. So Edmond had to
separate the branches or brush away the moss to know where the guide-
marks were. The sight of marks renewed Edmond fondest hopes. Might it
not have been the cardinal himself who had first traced them, in order
that they might serve as a guide for his nephew in the event of a
catastrophe, which he could not foresee would have been so complete.
This solitary place was precisely suited to the requirements of a man
desirous of burying treasure. Only, might not these betraying marks have
attracted other eyes than those for whom they were made? and had the
dark and wondrous island indeed faithfully guarded its precious secret?


It seemed, however, to Edmond, who was hidden from his comrades by the
inequalities of the ground, that at sixty paces from the harbor the
marks ceased; nor did they terminate at any grotto. A large round rock,
placed solidly on its base, was the only spot to which they seemed to
lead. Edmond concluded that perhaps instead of having reached the end of
the route he had only explored its beginning, and he therefore turned
round and retraced his steps.

Meanwhile his comrades had prepared the repast, had got some water from
a spring, spread out the fruit and bread, and cooked the kid. Just at
the moment when they were taking the dainty animal from the spit, they
saw Edmond springing with the boldness of a chamois from rock to rock,
and they fired the signal agreed upon. The sportsman instantly changed
his direction, and ran quickly towards them. But even while they watched
his daring progress, Edmond's foot slipped, and they saw him stagger on
the edge of a rock and disappear. They all rushed towards him, for all
loved Edmond in spite of his superiority; yet Jacopo reached him first.

He found Edmond lying prone, bleeding, and almost senseless. He had
rolled down a declivity of twelve or fifteen feet. They poured a little
rum down his throat, and this remedy which had before been so beneficial
to him, produced the same effect as formerly. Edmond opened his eyes,
complained of great pain in his knee, a feeling of heaviness in his
head, and severe pains in his loins. They wished to carry him to the
shore; but when they touched him, although under Jacopo's directions, he
declared, with heavy groans, that he could not bear to be moved.

It may be supposed that Dantès did not now think of his dinner, but he
insisted that his comrades, who had not his reasons for fasting, should
have their meal. As for himself, he declared that he had only need of a
little rest, and that when they returned he should be easier. The
sailors did not require much urging. They were hungry, and the smell of
the roasted kid was very savory, and your tars are not very ceremonious.
An hour afterwards they returned. All that Edmond had been able to do
was to drag himself about a dozen paces forward to lean against a moss-
grown rock.

But, instead of growing easier, Dantès' pains appeared to increase in
violence. The old patron, who was obliged to sail in the morning in
order to land his cargo on the frontiers of Piedmont and France, between
Nice and Fréjus, urged Dantès to try and rise. Edmond made great
exertions in order to comply; but at each effort he fell back, moaning
and turning pale.

"He has broken his ribs," said the commander, in a low voice. "No
matter; he is an excellent fellow, and we must not leave him. We will
try and carry him on board the tartan." Dantès declared, however, that
he would rather die where he was than undergo the agony which the
slightest movement cost him. "Well," said the patron, "let what may
happen, it shall never be said that we deserted a good comrade like you.
We will not go till evening." This very much astonished the sailors,
although, not one opposed it. The patron was so strict that this was the
first time they had ever seen him give up an enterprise, or even delay
in its execution. Dantès would not allow that any such infraction of
regular and proper rules should be made in his favor. "No, no," he said
to the patron, "I was awkward, and it is just that I pay the penalty of
my clumsiness. Leave me a small supply of biscuit, a gun, powder, and
balls, to kill the kids or defend myself at need, and a pickaxe, that I
may build a shelter if you delay in coming back for me."

"But you'll die of hunger," said the patron.

"I would rather do so," was Edmond reply, "than suffer the inexpressible
agonies which the slightest movement causes me." The patron turned
towards his vessel, which was rolling on the swell in the little harbor,
and, with sails partly set, would be ready for sea when her toilet
should be completed.

"What are we to do, Maltese?" asked the captain. "We cannot leave you
here so, and yet we cannot stay."

"Go, go!" exclaimed Dantès.

"We shall be absent at least a week," said the patron, "and then we must
run out of our course to come here and take you up again."

"Why," said Dantès, "if in two or three days you hail any fishing-boat,
