and rubies. He would, no doubt, have believed that he had returned to
the times of Florian, and would have declared, on reaching Paris, that
he had met an Alpine shepherdess seated at the foot of the Sabine Hill.
At the end of a quarter of an hour Vampa quitted the grotto; his costume
was no less elegant than that of Teresa. He wore a vest of garnet-
colored velvet, with buttons of cut gold; a silk waistcoat covered with
embroidery; a Roman scarf tied round his neck; a cartridge-box worked
with gold, and red and green silk; sky-blue velvet breeches, fastened
above the knee with diamond buckles; garters of deerskin, worked with a
thousand arabesques, and a hat whereon hung ribbons of all colors; two
watches hung from his girdle, and a splendid poniard was in his belt.
Teresa uttered a cry of admiration. Vampa in this attire resembled a
painting by Leopold Robert or Schnetz. He had assumed the entire costume
of Cucumetto. The young man saw the effect produced on his betrothed,
and a smile of pride passed over his lips.

"'Now,' he said to Teresa, 'are you ready to share my fortune, whatever
it may be?'

"'Oh, yes!' exclaimed the young girl enthusiastically.

"'And follow me wherever I go?'

"'To the world's end.'

"'Then take my arm, and let us on; we have no time to lose.'

"The young girl did so without questioning her lover as to where he was
conducting her, for he appeared to her at this moment as handsome,
proud, and powerful as a god. They went towards the forest, and soon
entered it.

"We need scarcely say that all the paths of the mountain were known to
Vampa; he therefore went forward without a moment's hesitation, although
there was no beaten track, but he knew his path by looking at the trees
and bushes, and thus they kept on advancing for nearly an hour and a
half. At the end of this time they had reached the thickest of the
forest. A torrent, whose bed was dry, led into a deep gorge. Vampa took
this wild road, which, enclosed between two ridges, and shadowed by the
tufted umbrage of the pines, seemed, but for the difficulties of its
descent, that path to Avernus of which Virgil speaks. Teresa had become
alarmed at the wild and deserted look of the plain around her, and
pressed closely against her guide, not uttering a syllable; but as she
saw him advance with even step and composed countenance, she endeavored
to repress her emotion. Suddenly, about ten paces from them, a man
advanced from behind a tree and aimed at Vampa.

"'Not another step,' he said, 'or you are a dead man.'

"'What, then,' said Vampa, raising his hand with a gesture of disdain,
while Teresa, no longer able to restrain her alarm, clung closely to
him, 'do wolves rend each other?'

"'Who are you?' inquired the sentinel.

"'I am Luigi Vampa, shepherd of the San-Felice farm.'

"'What do you want?'

"'I would speak with your companions who are in the glade at Rocca
Bianca.'

"'Follow me, then,' said the sentinel; 'or, as you know your way, go
first.'

"Vampa smiled disdainfully at this precaution on the part of the bandit,
went before Teresa, and continued to advance with the same firm and easy
step as before. At the end of ten minutes the bandit made them a sign to
stop. The two young persons obeyed. Then the bandit thrice imitated the
cry of a crow; a croak answered this signal.

"'Good!' said the sentry, 'you may now go on.'

"Luigi and Teresa again set forward; as they went on Teresa clung
tremblingly to her lover at the sight of weapons and the glistening of
carbines through the trees. The retreat of Rocca Bianca was at the top
of a small mountain, which no doubt in former days had been a volcano--
an extinct volcano before the days when Remus and Romulus had deserted
Alba to come and found the city of Rome. Teresa and Luigi reached the
summit, and all at once found themselves in the presence of twenty
bandits.

"'Here is a young man who seeks and wishes to speak to you,' said the
sentinel.

"'What has he to say?' inquired the young man who was in command in the
chief's absence.

"'I wish to say that I am tired of a shepherd's life,' was Vampa's
reply.

"'Ah, I understand,' said the lieutenant; 'and you seek admittance into
our ranks?'

"'Welcome!' cried several bandits from Ferrusino, Pampinara, and Anagni,
who had recognized Luigi Vampa.

"'Yes, but I came to ask something more than to be your companion.'

"'And what may that be?' inquired the bandits with astonishment.

"'I come to ask to be your captain,' said the young man.

"The bandits shouted with laughter.

"'And what have you done to aspire to this honor?' demanded the
lieutenant.

"'I have killed your chief, Cucumetto, whose dress I now wear; and I set
fire to the villa San-Felice to procure a wedding-dress for my
betrothed.' An hour afterwards Luigi Vampa was chosen captain, vice
Cucumetto deceased."


"Well, my dear Albert," said Franz, turning towards his friend; "what
think you of citizen Luigi Vampa?"

"I say he is a myth," replied Albert, "and never had an existence."

"And what may a myth be?" inquired Pastrini.

"The explanation would be too long, my dear landlord," replied Franz.

"And you say that Signor Vampa exercises his profession at this moment
in the environs of Rome?"

"And with a boldness of which no bandit before him ever gave an
example."

"Then the police have vainly tried to lay hands on him?"

"Why, you see, he has a good understanding with the shepherds in the
plains, the fishermen of the Tiber, and the smugglers of the coast. They
seek for him in the mountains, and he is on the waters; they follow him
on the waters, and he is on the open sea; then they pursue him, and he
has suddenly taken refuge in the islands, at Giglio, Guanouti, or Monte
Cristo; and when they hunt for him there, he reappears suddenly at
Albano, Tivoli, or La Riccia."

"And how does he behave towards travellers?"

"Alas! his plan is very simple. It depends on the distance he may be
from the city, whether he gives eight hours, twelve hours, or a day
wherein to pay their ransom; and when that time has elapsed he allows
another hour's grace. At the sixtieth minute of this hour, if the money
is not forthcoming, he blows out the prisoner's brains with a pistol-
shot, or plants his dagger in his heart, and that settles the account."

"Well, Albert," inquired Franz of his companion, "are you still disposed
to go to the Colosseum by the outer wall?"

"Quite so," said Albert, "if the way be picturesque." The clock struck
nine as the door opened, and a coachman appeared. "Excellencies," said
he, "the coach is ready."

"Well, then," said Franz, "let us to the Colosseum."

"By the Porta del Popolo or by the streets, your excellencies?"

"By the streets, _morbleu!_ by the streets!" cried Franz.

"Ah, my dear fellow," said Albert, rising, and lighting his third cigar,
"really, I thought you had more courage." So saying, the two young men
went down the staircase, and got into the carriage.



Chapter 34. The Colosseum

Franz had so managed his route, that during the ride to the Colosseum
they passed not a single ancient ruin, so that no preliminary impression
interfered to mitigate the colossal proportions of the gigantic building
they came to admire. The road selected was a continuation of the Via
Sistina; then by cutting off the right angle of the street in which
stands Santa Maria Maggiore and proceeding by the Via Urbana and San
Pietro in Vincoli, the travellers would find themselves directly
opposite the Colosseum.

This itinerary possessed another great advantage,--that of leaving Franz
at full liberty to indulge his deep reverie upon the subject of Signor
Pastrini's story, in which his mysterious host of Monte Cristo was so
strangely mixed up. Seated with folded arms in a corner of the carriage,
he continued to ponder over the singular history he had so lately
listened to, and to ask himself an interminable number of questions
touching its various circumstances without, however, arriving at a
satisfactory reply to any of them.

One fact more than the rest brought his friend "Sinbad the Sailor" back
to his recollection, and that was the mysterious sort of intimacy that
seemed to exist between the brigands and the sailors; and Pastrini's
account of Vampa's having found refuge on board the vessels of smugglers
and fishermen, reminded Franz of the two Corsican bandits he had found
supping so amicably with the crew of the little yacht, which had even
deviated from its course and touched at Porto-Vecchio for the sole
purpose of landing them. The very name assumed by his host of Monte
Cristo and again repeated by the landlord of the Hôtel de Londres,
abundantly proved to him that his island friend was playing his
philanthropic part on the shores of Piombino, Civita Vecchia, Ostia, and
Gaëta, as on those of Corsica, Tuscany, and Spain; and further, Franz
bethought him of having heard his singular entertainer speak both of
