was a _coupé_ of Koller's building, and with horses and harness for
which Drake had, to the knowledge of all the lions of Paris, refused on
the previous day seven hundred guineas. "Monsieur," said the count to
Albert, "I do not ask you to accompany me to my house, as I can only
show you a habitation fitted up in a hurry, and I have, as you know, a
reputation to keep up as regards not being taken by surprise. Give me,
therefore, one more day before I invite you; I shall then be certain not
to fail in my hospitality."

"If you ask me for a day, count, I know what to anticipate; it will not
be a house I shall see, but a palace. You have decidedly some genius at
your control."

"_Ma foi_, spread that idea," replied the Count of Monte Cristo, putting
his foot on the velvet-lined steps of his splendid carriage, "and that
will be worth something to me among the ladies." As he spoke, he sprang
into the vehicle, the door was closed, but not so rapidly that Monte
Cristo failed to perceive the almost imperceptible movement which
stirred the curtains of the apartment in which he had left Madame de
Morcerf. When Albert returned to his mother, he found her in the boudoir
reclining in a large velvet armchair, the whole room so obscure that
only the shining spangle, fastened here and there to the drapery, and
the angles of the gilded frames of the pictures, showed with some degree
of brightness in the gloom. Albert could not see the face of the
countess, as it was covered with a thin veil she had put on her head,
and which fell over her features in misty folds, but it seemed to him as
though her voice had altered. He could distinguish amid the perfumes of
the roses and heliotropes in the flower-stands, the sharp and fragrant
odor of volatile salts, and he noticed in one of the chased cups on the
mantle-piece the countess's smelling-bottle, taken from its shagreen
case, and exclaimed in a tone of uneasiness, as he entered,--"My dear
mother, have you been ill during my absence?"

"No, no, Albert, but you know these roses, tuberoses, and orange-flowers
throw out at first, before one is used to them, such violent perfumes."

"Then, my dear mother," said Albert, putting his hand to the bell, "they
must be taken into the antechamber. You are really ill, and just now
were so pale as you came into the room----"

"Was I pale, Albert?"

"Yes; a pallor that suits you admirably, mother, but which did not the
less alarm my father and myself."


"Did your father speak of it?" inquired Mercédès eagerly.

"No, madame; but do you not remember that he spoke of the fact to you?"

"Yes, I do remember," replied the countess. A servant entered, summoned
by Albert's ring of the bell. "Take these flowers into the anteroom or
dressing-room," said the viscount; "they make the countess ill." The
footman obeyed his orders. A long pause ensued, which lasted until all
the flowers were removed. "What is this name of Monte Cristo?" inquired
the countess, when the servant had taken away the last vase of flowers,
"is it a family name, or the name of the estate, or a simple title?"

"I believe, mother, it is merely a title. The count purchased an island
in the Tuscan archipelago, and, as he told you today, has founded a
commandery. You know the same thing was done for Saint Stephen of
Florence, Saint George, Constantinian of Parma, and even for the Order
of Malta. Except this, he has no pretension to nobility, and calls
himself a chance count, although the general opinion at Rome is that the
count is a man of very high distinction."

"His manners are admirable," said the countess, "at least, as far as I
could judge in the few minutes he remained here."

"They are perfect mother, so perfect, that they surpass by far all I
have known in the leading aristocracy of the three proudest nobilities
of Europe--the English, the Spanish, and the German." The countess
paused a moment; then, after a slight hesitation, she resumed,--"You
have seen, my dear Albert--I ask the question as a mother--you have seen
M. de Monte Cristo in his house, you are quicksighted, have much
knowledge of the world, more tact than is usual at your age, do you
think the count is really what he appears to be?"

"What does he appear to be?"

"Why, you have just said,--a man of high distinction."

"I told you, my dear mother, he was esteemed such."

"But what is your own opinion, Albert?"

"I must tell you that I have not come to any decided opinion respecting
him, but I think him a Maltese."

"I do not ask you of his origin but what he is."

"Ah, what he is; that is quite another thing. I have seen so many
remarkable things in him, that if you would have me really say what I
think, I shall reply that I really do look upon him as one of Byron's
heroes, whom misery has marked with a fatal brand; some Manfred, some
Lara, some Werner, one of those wrecks, as it were, of some ancient
family, who, disinherited of their patrimony, have achieved one by the
force of their adventurous genius, which has placed them above the laws
of society."

"You say----"

"I say that Monte Cristo is an island in the midst of the Mediterranean,
without inhabitants or garrison, the resort of smugglers of all nations,
and pirates of every flag. Who knows whether or not these industrious
worthies do not pay to their feudal lord some dues for his protection?"

"That is possible," said the countess, reflecting.

"Never mind," continued the young man, "smuggler or not, you must agree,
mother dear, as you have seen him, that the Count of Monte Cristo is a
remarkable man, who will have the greatest success in the salons of
Paris. Why, this very morning, in my rooms, he made his _entrée_ amongst
us by striking every man of us with amazement, not even excepting
Château-Renaud."

"And what do you suppose is the count's age?" inquired Mercédès,
evidently attaching great importance to this question.

"Thirty-five or thirty-six, mother."

"So young,--it is impossible," said Mercédès, replying at the same time
to what Albert said as well as to her own private reflection.

"It is the truth, however. Three or four times he has said to me, and
certainly without the slightest premeditation, 'at such a period I was
five years old, at another ten years old, at another twelve,' and I,
induced by curiosity, which kept me alive to these details, have
compared the dates, and never found him inaccurate. The age of this
singular man, who is of no age, is then, I am certain, thirty-five.
Besides, mother, remark how vivid his eye, how raven-black his hair, and
his brow, though so pale, is free from wrinkles,--he is not only
vigorous, but also young." The countess bent her head, as if beneath a
heavy wave of bitter thoughts. "And has this man displayed a friendship
for you, Albert?" she asked with a nervous shudder.

"I am inclined to think so."

"And--do--you--like--him?"

"Why, he pleases me in spite of Franz d'Epinay, who tries to convince me
that he is a being returned from the other world."

The countess shuddered.

"Albert," she said, in a voice which was altered by emotion, "I have
always put you on your guard against new acquaintances. Now you are a
man, and are able to give me advice; yet I repeat to you, Albert, be
prudent."

"Why, my dear mother, it is necessary, in order to make your advice turn
to account, that I should know beforehand what I have to distrust. The
count never plays, he only drinks pure water tinged with a little
sherry, and is so rich that he cannot, without intending to laugh at me,
try to borrow money. What, then, have I to fear from him?"

"You are right," said the countess, "and my fears are weakness,
especially when directed against a man who has saved your life. How did
your father receive him, Albert? It is necessary that we should be more
than complaisant to the count. M. de Morcerf is sometimes occupied, his
business makes him reflective, and he might, without intending it----"

"Nothing could be in better taste than my father's demeanor, madame,"
said Albert; "nay, more, he seemed greatly flattered at two or three
compliments which the count very skilfully and agreeably paid him with
as much ease as if he had known him these thirty years. Each of these
little tickling arrows must have pleased my father," added Albert with a
laugh. "And thus they parted the best possible friends, and M. de
Morcerf even wished to take him to the Chamber to hear the speakers."
The countess made no reply. She fell into so deep a reverie that her
eyes gradually closed. The young man, standing up before her, gazed upon
her with that filial affection which is so tender and endearing with
children whose mothers are still young and handsome. Then, after seeing
her eyes closed, and hearing her breathe gently, he believed she had
dropped asleep, and left the apartment on tiptoe, closing the door after
him with the utmost precaution. "This devil of a fellow," he muttered,
shaking his head; "I said at the time he would create a sensation here,
and I measure his effect by an infallible thermometer. My mother has
noticed him, and he must therefore, perforce, be remarkable." He went
down to the stables, not without some slight annoyance, when he
remembered that the Count of Monte Cristo had laid his hands on a
"turnout" which sent his bays down to second place in the opinion of
connoisseurs. "Most decidedly," said he, "men are not equal, and I must
beg my father to develop this theorem in the Chamber of Peers."



Chapter 42. Monsieur Bertuccio

Meanwhile the count had arrived at his house; it had taken him six
minutes to perform the distance, but these six minutes were sufficient
to induce twenty young men who knew the price of the equipage they had
been unable to purchase themselves, to put their horses in a gallop in
order to see the rich foreigner who could afford to give 20,000 francs
apiece for his horses.

The house Ali had chosen, and which was to serve as a town residence to
Monte Cristo, was situated on the right hand as you ascend the Champs-
Élysées. A thick clump of trees and shrubs rose in the centre, and
masked a portion of the front; around this shrubbery two alleys, like
