noble nature; try to gain his esteem.'"

"Indeed?" said Monte Cristo, sighing.

"You see, then," said Albert, "that instead of opposing, she will
encourage me."

"Adieu, then, until five o'clock; be punctual, and we shall arrive at
twelve or one."

"At Tréport?"

"Yes; or in the neighborhood."

"But can we travel forty-eight leagues in eight hours?"

"Easily," said Monte Cristo.

"You are certainly a prodigy; you will soon not only surpass the
railway, which would not be very difficult in France, but even the
telegraph."

"But, viscount, since we cannot perform the journey in less than seven
or eight hours, do not keep me waiting."

"Do not fear, I have little to prepare." Monte Cristo smiled as he
nodded to Albert, then remained a moment absorbed in deep meditation.
But passing his hand across his forehead as if to dispel his reverie, he
rang the bell twice and Bertuccio entered. "Bertuccio," said he, "I
intend going this evening to Normandy, instead of tomorrow or the next
day. You will have sufficient time before five o'clock; despatch a
messenger to apprise the grooms at the first station. M. de Morcerf will
accompany me." Bertuccio obeyed and despatched a courier to Pontoise to
say the travelling-carriage would arrive at six o'clock. From Pontoise
another express was sent to the next stage, and in six hours all the
horses stationed on the road were ready. Before his departure, the count
went to Haydée's apartments, told her his intention, and resigned
everything to her care.

Albert was punctual. The journey soon became interesting from its
rapidity, of which Morcerf had formed no previous idea. "Truly," said
Monte Cristo, "with your post-horses going at the rate of two leagues an
hour, and that absurd law that one traveller shall not pass another
without permission, so that an invalid or ill-tempered traveller may
detain those who are well and active, it is impossible to move; I escape
this annoyance by travelling with my own postilion and horses; do I not,
Ali?"

The count put his head out of the window and whistled, and the horses
appeared to fly. The carriage rolled with a thundering noise over the
pavement, and everyone turned to notice the dazzling meteor. Ali,
smiling, repeated the sound, grasped the reins with a firm hand, and
spurred his horses, whose beautiful manes floated in the breeze. This
child of the desert was in his element, and with his black face and
sparkling eyes appeared, in the cloud of dust he raised, like the genius
of the simoom and the god of the hurricane. "I never knew till now the
delight of speed," said Morcerf, and the last cloud disappeared from his
brow; "but where the devil do you get such horses? Are they made to
order?"

"Precisely," said the count; "six years since I bought a horse in
Hungary remarkable for its swiftness. The thirty-two that we shall use
tonight are its progeny; they are all entirely black, with the exception
of a star upon the forehead."

"That is perfectly admirable; but what do you do, count, with all these
horses?"

"You see, I travel with them."

"But you are not always travelling."

"When I no longer require them, Bertuccio will sell them, and he expects
to realize thirty or forty thousand francs by the sale."

"But no monarch in Europe will be wealthy enough to purchase them."

"Then he will sell them to some Eastern vizier, who will empty his
coffers to purchase them, and refill them by applying the bastinado to
his subjects."

"Count, may I suggest one idea to you?"

"Certainly."

"It is that, next to you, Bertuccio must be the richest gentleman in
Europe."

"You are mistaken, viscount; I believe he has not a franc in his
possession."

"Then he must be a wonder. My dear count, if you tell me many more
marvellous things, I warn you I shall not believe them."

"I countenance nothing that is marvellous, M. Albert. Tell me, why does
a steward rob his master?"

"Because, I suppose, it is his nature to do so, for the love of
robbing."

"You are mistaken; it is because he has a wife and family, and ambitious
desires for himself and them. Also because he is not sure of always
retaining his situation, and wishes to provide for the future. Now, M.
Bertuccio is alone in the world; he uses my property without accounting
for the use he makes of it; he is sure never to leave my service."

"Why?"

"Because I should never get a better."

"Probabilities are deceptive."

"But I deal in certainties; he is the best servant over whom one has the
power of life and death."

"Do you possess that right over Bertuccio?"

"Yes."

There are words which close a conversation with an iron door; such was
the count's "yes." The whole journey was performed with equal rapidity;
the thirty-two horses, dispersed over seven stages, brought them to
their destination in eight hours. At midnight they arrived at the gate
of a beautiful park. The porter was in attendance; he had been apprised
by the groom of the last stage of the count's approach. At half past two
in the morning Morcerf was conducted to his apartments, where a bath and
supper were prepared. The servant who had travelled at the back of the
carriage waited on him; Baptistin, who rode in front, attended the
count.

Albert bathed, took his supper, and went to bed. All night he was lulled
by The melancholy noise of the surf. On rising, he went to his window,
which opened on a terrace, having the sea in front, and at the back a
pretty park bounded by a small forest.

In a creek lay a little sloop, with a narrow keel and high masts,
bearing on its flag the Monte Cristo arms which were a mountain on a sea
azure, with a cross gules in chief which might be an allusion to his
name that recalled Calvary, the mount rendered by our Lord's passion
more precious than gold, and to the degrading cross which his blood had
rendered holy; or it might be some personal remembrance of suffering and
regeneration buried in the night of this mysterious personage's pas
life.

Around the schooner lay a number of small fishing-boats belonging to the
fishermen of the neighboring village, like humble subjects awaiting
orders from their queen. There, as in every spot where Monte Cristo
stopped, if but for two days, luxury abounded and life went on with the
utmost ease.

Albert found in his anteroom two guns, with all the accoutrements for
hunting; a lofty room on the ground floor containing all the ingenious
instruments the English--eminent in piscatory pursuits, since they are
patient and sluggish--have invented for fishing. The day passed in
pursuing those exercises in which Monte Cristo excelled. They killed a
dozen pheasants in the park, as many trout in the stream, dined in a
summer-house overlooking the ocean, and took tea in the library.

Towards the evening of the third day. Albert, completely exhausted with
the exercise which invigorated Monte Cristo, was sleeping in an armchair
near the window, while the count was designing with his architect the
plan of a conservatory in his house, when the sound of a horse at full
speed on the high road made Albert look up. He was disagreeably
surprised to see his own valet de chambre, whom he had not brought, that
he might not inconvenience Monte Cristo.


"Florentin here!" cried he, starting up; "is my mother ill?" And he
hastened to the door. Monte Cristo watched and saw him approach the
valet, who drew a small sealed parcel from his pocket, containing a
newspaper and a letter. "From whom is this?" said he eagerly. "From M.
Beauchamp," replied Florentin.

"Did he send you?"

"Yes, sir; he sent for me to his house, gave me money for my journey,
procured a horse, and made me promise not to stop till I had reached
you, I have come in fifteen hours."

Albert opened the letter with fear, uttered a shriek on reading the
first line, and seized the paper. His sight was dimmed, his legs sank
under him, and he would have fallen had not Florentin supported him.

"Poor young man," said Monte Cristo in a low voice; "it is then true
that the sin of the father shall fall on the children to the third and
fourth generation." Meanwhile Albert had revived, and, continuing to
read, he threw back his head, saying, "Florentin, is your horse fit to
return immediately?"

"It is a poor lame post-horse."

"In what state was the house when you left?"

"All was quiet, but on returning from M. Beauchamp's, I found madame in
tears; she had sent for me to know when you would return. I told her my
orders from M. Beauchamp; she first extended her arms to prevent me, but
after a moment's reflection, 'Yes, go, Florentin,' said she, 'and may he
come quickly.'"

"Yes, my mother," said Albert, "I will return, and woe to the infamous
