his voice so as to be heard by those in the adjoining boxes and in the
lobby. Thus the attention of many was attracted by this altercation.

"Where are you come from, sir? " said Monte Cristo "You do not appear to
be in the possession of your senses."

"Provided I understand your perfidy, sir, and succeed in making you
understand that I will be revenged, I shall be reasonable enough," said
Albert furiously.

"I do not understand you, sir," replied Monte Cristo; "and if I did,
your tone is too high. I am at home here, and I alone have a right to
raise my voice above another's. Leave the box, sir!" Monte Cristo
pointed towards the door with the most commanding dignity. "Ah, I shall
know how to make you leave your home!" replied Albert, clasping in his
convulsed grasp the glove, which Monte Cristo did not lose sight of.

"Well, well," said Monte Cristo quietly, "I see you wish to quarrel with
me; but I would give you one piece of advice, which you will do well to
keep in mind. It is in poor taste to make a display of a challenge.
Display is not becoming to everyone, M. de Morcerf."

At this name a murmur of astonishment passed around the group of
spectators of this scene. They had talked of no one but Morcerf the
whole day. Albert understood the allusion in a moment, and was about to
throw his glove at the count, when Morrel seized his hand, while
Beauchamp and Château-Renaud, fearing the scene would surpass the limits
of a challenge, held him back. But Monte Cristo, without rising, and
leaning forward in his chair, merely stretched out his arm and, taking
the damp, crushed glove from the clenched hand of the young man, "Sir,"
said he in a solemn tone, "I consider your glove thrown, and will return
it to you wrapped around a bullet. Now leave me or I will summon my
servants to throw you out at the door."

Wild, almost unconscious, and with eyes inflamed, Albert stepped back,
and Morrel closed the door. Monte Cristo took up his glass again as if
nothing had happened; his face was like marble, and his heart was like
bronze. Morrel whispered, "What have you done to him?"

"I? Nothing--at least personally," said Monte Cristo.

"But there must be some cause for this strange scene."

"The Count of Morcerf's adventure exasperates the young man."

"Have you anything to do with it?"

"It was through Haydée that the Chamber was informed of his father's
treason."

"Indeed?" said Morrel. "I had been told, but would not credit it, that
the Grecian slave I have seen with you here in this very box was the
daughter of Ali Pasha."

"It is true, nevertheless."

"Then," said Morrel, "I understand it all, and this scene was
premeditated."

"How so?"

"Yes. Albert wrote to request me to come to the Opera, doubtless that I
might be a witness to the insult he meant to offer you."

"Probably," said Monte Cristo with his imperturbable tranquillity.

"But what shall you do with him?"

"With whom?"

"With Albert."

"What shall I do with Albert? As certainly, Maximilian, as I now press
your hand, I shall kill him before ten o'clock tomorrow morning."
Morrel, in his turn, took Monte Cristo's hand in both of his, and he
shuddered to feel how cold and steady it was.

"Ah, Count," said he, "his father loves him so much!"

"Do not speak to me of that," said Monte Cristo, with the first movement
of anger he had betrayed; "I will make him suffer." Morrel, amazed, let
fall Monte Cristo's hand. "Count, count!" said he.

"Dear Maximilian," interrupted the count, "listen how adorably Duprez is
singing that line,--


'O Mathilde! idole de mon âme!'

"I was the first to discover Duprez at Naples, and the first to applaud
him. Bravo, bravo!" Morrel saw it was useless to say more, and
refrained. The curtain, which had risen at the close of the scene with
Albert, again fell, and a rap was heard at the door.

"Come in," said Monte Cristo with a voice that betrayed not the least
emotion; and immediately Beauchamp appeared. "Good-evening, M.
Beauchamp," said Monte Cristo, as if this was the first time he had seen
the journalist that evening; "be seated."

Beauchamp bowed, and, sitting down, "Sir," said he, "I just now
accompanied M. de Morcerf, as you saw."

"And that means," replied Monte Cristo, laughing, "that you had,
probably, just dined together. I am happy to see, M. Beauchamp, that you
are more sober than he was."

"Sir," said M. Beauchamp, "Albert was wrong, I acknowledge, to betray so
much anger, and I come, on my own account, to apologize for him. And
having done so, entirely on my own account, be it understood, I would
add that I believe you too gentlemanly to refuse giving him some
explanation concerning your connection with Yanina. Then I will add two
words about the young Greek girl." Monte Cristo motioned him to be
silent. "Come," said he, laughing, "there are all my hopes about to be
destroyed."

"How so?" asked Beauchamp.

"Doubtless you wish to make me appear a very eccentric character. I am,
in your opinion, a Lara, a Manfred, a Lord Ruthven; then, just as I am
arriving at the climax, you defeat your own end, and seek to make an
ordinary man of me. You bring me down to your own level, and demand
explanations! Indeed, M. Beauchamp, it is quite laughable."

"Yet," replied Beauchamp haughtily, "there are occasions when probity
commands----"

"M. Beauchamp," interposed this strange man, "the Count of Monte Cristo
bows to none but the Count of Monte Cristo himself. Say no more, I
entreat you. I do what I please, M. Beauchamp, and it is always well
done."

"Sir," replied the young man, "honest men are not to be paid with such
coin. I require honorable guaranties."

"I am, sir, a living guaranty," replied Monte Cristo, motionless, but
with a threatening look; "we have both blood in our veins which we wish
to shed--that is our mutual guaranty. Tell the viscount so, and that
tomorrow, before ten o'clock, I shall see what color his is."

"Then I have only to make arrangements for the duel," said Beauchamp.

"It is quite immaterial to me," said Monte Cristo, "and it was very
unnecessary to disturb me at the Opera for such a trifle. In France
people fight with the sword or pistol, in the colonies with the carbine,
in Arabia with the dagger. Tell your client that, although I am the
insulted party, in order to carry out my eccentricity, I leave him the
choice of arms, and will accept without discussion, without dispute,
anything, even combat by drawing lots, which is always stupid, but with
me different from other people, as I am sure to gain."

"Sure to gain!" repeated Beauchamp, looking with amazement at the count.

"Certainly," said Monte Cristo, slightly shrugging his shoulders;
"otherwise I would not fight with M. de Morcerf. I shall kill him--I
cannot help it. Only by a single line this evening at my house let me
know the arms and the hour; I do not like to be kept waiting."

"Pistols, then, at eight o'clock, in the Bois de Vincennes," said
Beauchamp, quite disconcerted, not knowing if he was dealing with an
arrogant braggadocio or a supernatural being.

"Very well, sir," said Monte Cristo. "Now all that is settled, do let me
see the performance, and tell your friend Albert not to come any more
this evening; he will hurt himself with all his ill-chosen barbarisms:
let him go home and go to sleep." Beauchamp left the box, perfectly
amazed. "Now," said Monte Cristo, turning towards Morrel, "I may depend
upon you, may I not?"

"Certainly," said Morrel, "I am at your service, count; still----"

"What?"

"It is desirable I should know the real cause."

"That is to say, you would rather not?"

"No."

"The young man himself is acting blindfolded, and knows not the true
cause, which is known only to God and to me; but I give you my word,
Morrel, that God, who does know it, will be on our side."

"Enough," said Morrel; "who is your second witness?"

"I know no one in Paris, Morrel, on whom I could confer that honor
besides you and your brother Emmanuel. Do you think Emmanuel would
oblige me?"

"I will answer for him, count."

"Well? that is all I require. Tomorrow morning, at seven o'clock, you
will be with me, will you not?"

"We will."

"Hush, the curtain is rising. Listen! I never lose a note of this opera
if I can avoid it; the music of _William Tell_ is so sweet."



