I have never been accustomed to play the patriarch in my family, nor
have I ever considered that the fate of a universe was to be decided by
my nod. Nevertheless, it is necessary that my will should be respected
in my family, and that the folly of an old man and the caprice of a
child should not be allowed to overturn a project which I have
entertained for so many years. The Baron d'Epinay was my friend, as you
know, and an alliance with his son is the most suitable thing that could
possibly be arranged."

"Do you think," said Madame de Villefort, "that Valentine is in league
with him? She has always been opposed to this marriage, and I should not
be at all surprised if what we have just seen and heard is nothing but
the execution of a plan concerted between them."

"Madame," said Villefort, "believe me, a fortune of 900,000 francs is
not so easily renounced."

"She could, nevertheless, make up her mind to renounce the world, sir,
since it is only about a year ago that she herself proposed entering a
convent."

"Never mind," replied Villefort; "I say that this marriage _shall_ be
consummated."


"Notwithstanding your father's wishes to the contrary?" said Madame de
Villefort, selecting a new point of attack. "That is a serious thing."
Monte Cristo, who pretended not to be listening, heard however, every
word that was said. "Madame," replied Villefort "I can truly say that I
have always entertained a high respect for my father, because, to the
natural feeling of relationship was added the consciousness of his moral
superiority. The name of father is sacred in two senses; he should be
reverenced as the author of our being and as a master whom we ought to
obey. But, under the present circumstances, I am justified in doubting
the wisdom of an old man who, because he hated the father, vents his
anger on the son. It would be ridiculous in me to regulate my conduct by
such caprices. I shall still continue to preserve the same respect
toward M. Noirtier; I will suffer, without complaint, the pecuniary
deprivation to which he has subjected me; but I shall remain firm in my
determination, and the world shall see which party has reason on his
side. Consequently I shall marry my daughter to the Baron Franz
d'Epinay, because I consider it would be a proper and eligible match for
her to make, and, in short, because I choose to bestow my daughter's
hand on whomever I please."

"What?" said the count, the approbation of whose eye Villefort had
frequently solicited during this speech. "What? Do you say that M.
Noirtier disinherits Mademoiselle de Villefort because she is going to
marry M. le Baron Franz d'Epinay?"

"Yes, sir, that is the reason," said Villefort, shrugging his shoulders.

"The apparent reason, at least," said Madame de Villefort.

"The _real_ reason, madame, I can assure you; I know my father."

"But I want to know in what way M. d'Epinay can have displeased your
father more than any other person?"

"I believe I know M. Franz d'Epinay," said the count; "is he not the son
of General de Quesnel, who was created Baron d'Epinay by Charles X.?"

"The same," said Villefort.

"Well, but he is a charming young man, according to my ideas."

"He is, which makes me believe that it is only an excuse of M. Noirtier
to prevent his granddaughter marrying; old men are always so selfish in
their affection," said Madame de Villefort.

"But," said Monte Cristo "do you not know any cause for this hatred?"

"Ah, _ma foi_, who is to know?"

"Perhaps it is some political difference?"

"My father and the Baron d'Epinay lived in the stormy times of which I
only saw the ending," said Villefort.

"Was not your father a Bonapartist?" asked Monte Cristo; "I think I
remember that you told me something of that kind."

"My father has been a Jacobin more than anything else," said Villefort,
carried by his emotion beyond the bounds of prudence; "and the senator's
robe, which Napoleon cast on his shoulders, only served to disguise the
old man without in any degree changing him. When my father conspired, it
was not for the emperor, it was against the Bourbons; for M. Noirtier
possessed this peculiarity, he never projected any Utopian schemes which
could never be realized, but strove for possibilities, and he applied to
the realization of these possibilities the terrible theories of The
Mountain,--theories that never shrank from any means that were deemed
necessary to bring about the desired result."

"Well," said Monte Cristo, "it is just as I thought; it was politics
which brought Noirtier and M. d'Epinay into personal contact. Although
General d'Epinay served under Napoleon, did he not still retain royalist
sentiments? And was he not the person who was assassinated one evening
on leaving a Bonapartist meeting to which he had been invited on the
supposition that he favored the cause of the emperor?" Villefort looked
at the count almost with terror. "Am I mistaken, then?" said Monte
Cristo.

"No, sir, the facts were precisely what you have stated," said Madame de
Villefort; "and it was to prevent the renewal of old feuds that M. de
Villefort formed the idea of uniting in the bonds of affection the two
children of these inveterate enemies."

"It was a sublime and charitable thought," said Monte Cristo, "and the
whole world should applaud it. It would be noble to see Mademoiselle
Noirtier de Villefort assuming the title of Madame Franz d'Epinay."
Villefort shuddered and looked at Monte Cristo as if he wished to read
in his countenance the real feelings which had dictated the words he had
just uttered. But the count completely baffled the procureur, and
prevented him from discovering anything beneath the never-varying smile
he was so constantly in the habit of assuming. "Although," said
Villefort, "it will be a serious thing for Valentine to lose her
grandfather's fortune, I do not think that M. d'Epinay will be
frightened at this pecuniary loss. He will, perhaps, hold me in greater
esteem than the money itself, seeing that I sacrifice everything in
order to keep my word with him. Besides, he knows that Valentine is rich
in right of her mother, and that she will, in all probability, inherit
the fortune of M. and Madame de Saint-Méran, her mother's parents, who
both love her tenderly."

"And who are fully as well worth loving and tending as M. Noirtier,"
said Madame de Villefort; "besides, they are to come to Paris in about a
month, and Valentine, after the affront she has received, need not
consider it necessary to continue to bury herself alive by being shut up
with M. Noirtier." The count listened with satisfaction to this tale of
wounded self-love and defeated ambition. "But it seems to me," said
Monte Cristo, "and I must begin by asking your pardon for what I am
about to say, that if M. Noirtier disinherits Mademoiselle de Villefort
because she is going to marry a man whose father he detested, he cannot
have the same cause of complaint against this dear Edward."

"True," said Madame de Villefort, with an intonation of voice which it
is impossible to describe; "is it not unjust--shamefully unjust? Poor
Edward is as much M. Noirtier's grandchild as Valentine, and yet, if she
had not been going to marry M. Franz, M. Noirtier would have left her
all his money; and supposing Valentine to be disinherited by her
grandfather, she will still be three times richer than he." The count
listened and said no more. "Count," said Villefort, "we will not
entertain you any longer with our family misfortunes. It is true that my
patrimony will go to endow charitable institutions, and my father will
have deprived me of my lawful inheritance without any reason for doing
so, but I shall have the satisfaction of knowing that I have acted like
a man of sense and feeling. M. d'Epinay, to whom I had promised the
interest of this sum, shall receive it, even if I endure the most cruel
privations."

"However," said Madame de Villefort, returning to the one idea which
incessantly occupied her mind, "perhaps it would be better to explain
this unlucky affair to M. d'Epinay, in order to give him the opportunity
of himself renouncing his claim to the hand of Mademoiselle de
Villefort."

"Ah, that would be a great pity," said Villefort.

"A great pity," said Monte Cristo.

"Undoubtedly," said Villefort, moderating the tones of his voice, "a
marriage once concerted and then broken off, throws a sort of discredit
on a young lady; then again, the old reports, which I was so anxious to
put an end to, will instantly gain ground. No, it will all go well; M.
d'Epinay, if he is an honorable man, will consider himself more than
ever pledged to Mademoiselle de Villefort, unless he were actuated by a
decided feeling of avarice, but that is impossible."

"I agree with M. de Villefort," said Monte Cristo, fixing his eyes on
Madame de Villefort; "and if I were sufficiently intimate with him to
allow of giving my advice, I would persuade him, since I have been told
M. d'Epinay is coming back, to settle this affair at once beyond all
possibility of revocation. I will answer for the success of a project
which will reflect so much honor on M. de Villefort." The procureur
arose, delighted with the proposition, but his wife slightly changed
color. "Well, that is all that I wanted, and I will be guided by a
counsellor such as you are," said he, extending his hand to Monte
Cristo. "Therefore let everyone here look upon what has passed today as
if it had not happened, and as though we had never thought of such a
thing as a change in our original plans."

"Sir," said the count, "the world, unjust as it is, will be pleased with
your resolution; your friends will be proud of you, and M. d'Epinay,
even if he took Mademoiselle de Villefort without any dowry, which he
will not do, would be delighted with the idea of entering a family which
could make such sacrifices in order to keep a promise and fulfil a
duty." At the conclusion of these words, the count rose to depart. "Are
you going to leave us, count?" said Madame de Villefort.

"I am sorry to say I must do so, madame, I only came to remind you of
your promise for Saturday."

"Did you fear that we should forget it?"

"You are very good, madame, but M. de Villefort has so many important
and urgent occupations."

"My husband has given me his word, sir," said Madame de Villefort; "you
have just seen him resolve to keep it when he has everything to lose,
and surely there is more reason for his doing so where he has everything
