
"You must teach me a small part of what you know," said Dantès, "if only
to prevent your growing weary of me. I can well believe that so learned
a person as yourself would prefer absolute solitude to being tormented
with the company of one as ignorant and uninformed as myself. If you
will only agree to my request, I promise you never to mention another
word about escaping." The abbé smiled. "Alas, my boy," said he, "human
knowledge is confined within very narrow limits; and when I have taught
you mathematics, physics, history, and the three or four modern
languages with which I am acquainted, you will know as much as I do
myself. Now, it will scarcely require two years for me to communicate to
you the stock of learning I possess."

"Two years!" exclaimed Dantès; "do you really believe I can acquire all
these things in so short a time?"

"Not their application, certainly, but their principles you may; to
learn is not to know; there are the learners and the learned. Memory
makes the one, philosophy the other."

"But cannot one learn philosophy?"

"Philosophy cannot be taught; it is the application of the sciences to
truth; it is like the golden cloud in which the Messiah went up into
heaven."

"Well, then," said Dantès, "What shall you teach me first? I am in a
hurry to begin. I want to learn."

"Everything," said the abbé. And that very evening the prisoners
sketched a plan of education, to be entered upon the following day.
Dantès possessed a prodigious memory, combined with an astonishing
quickness and readiness of conception; the mathematical turn of his mind
rendered him apt at all kinds of calculation, while his naturally
poetical feelings threw a light and pleasing veil over the dry reality
of arithmetical computation, or the rigid severity of geometry. He
already knew Italian, and had also picked up a little of the Romaic
dialect during voyages to the East; and by the aid of these two
languages he easily comprehended the construction of all the others, so
that at the end of six months he began to speak Spanish, English, and
German. In strict accordance with the promise made to the abbé, Dantès
spoke no more of escape. Perhaps the delight his studies afforded him
left no room for such thoughts; perhaps the recollection that he had
pledged his word (on which his sense of honor was keen) kept him from
referring in any way to the possibilities of flight. Days, even months,
passed by unheeded in one rapid and instructive course. At the end of a
year Dantès was a new man. Dantès observed, however, that Faria, in
spite of the relief his society afforded, daily grew sadder; one thought
seemed incessantly to harass and distract his mind. Sometimes he would
fall into long reveries, sigh heavily and involuntarily, then suddenly
rise, and, with folded arms, begin pacing the confined space of his
dungeon. One day he stopped all at once, and exclaimed, "Ah, if there
were no sentinel!"

"There shall not be one a minute longer than you please," said Dantès,
who had followed the working of his thoughts as accurately as though his
brain were enclosed in crystal so clear as to display its minutest
operations.

"I have already told you," answered the abbé, "that I loathe the idea of
shedding blood."

"And yet the murder, if you choose to call it so, would be simply a
measure of self-preservation."

"No matter! I could never agree to it."

"Still, you have thought of it?"

"Incessantly, alas!" cried the abbé.

"And you have discovered a means of regaining our freedom, have you
not?" asked Dantès eagerly.

"I have; if it were only possible to place a deaf and blind sentinel in
the gallery beyond us."

"He shall be both blind and deaf," replied the young man, with an air of
determination that made his companion shudder.

"No, no," cried the abbé; "impossible!" Dantès endeavored to renew the
subject; the abbé shook his head in token of disapproval, and refused to
make any further response. Three months passed away.

"Are you strong?" the abbé asked one day of Dantès. The young man, in
reply, took up the chisel, bent it into the form of a horseshoe, and
then as readily straightened it.

"And will you engage not to do any harm to the sentry, except as a last
resort?"

"I promise on my honor."

"Then," said the abbé, "we may hope to put our design into execution."

"And how long shall we be in accomplishing the necessary work?"

"At least a year."

"And shall we begin at once?"

"At once."

"We have lost a year to no purpose!" cried Dantès.

"Do you consider the last twelve months to have been wasted?" asked the
abbé.

"Forgive me!" cried Edmond, blushing deeply.

"Tut, tut!" answered the abbé, "man is but man after all, and you are
about the best specimen of the genus I have ever known. Come, let me
show you my plan." The abbé then showed Dantès the sketch he had made
for their escape. It consisted of a plan of his own cell and that of
Dantès, with the passage which united them. In this passage he proposed
to drive a level as they do in mines; this level would bring the two
prisoners immediately beneath the gallery where the sentry kept watch;
once there, a large excavation would be made, and one of the flag-stones
with which the gallery was paved be so completely loosened that at the
desired moment it would give way beneath the feet of the soldier, who,
stunned by his fall, would be immediately bound and gagged by Dantès
before he had power to offer any resistance. The prisoners were then to
make their way through one of the gallery windows, and to let themselves
down from the outer walls by means of the abbé's ladder of cords.
Dantès' eyes sparkled with joy, and he rubbed his hands with delight at
the idea of a plan so simple, yet apparently so certain to succeed.

That very day the miners began their labors, with a vigor and alacrity
proportionate to their long rest from fatigue and their hopes of
ultimate success. Nothing interrupted the progress of the work except
the necessity that each was under of returning to his cell in
anticipation of the turnkey's visits. They had learned to distinguish
the almost imperceptible sound of his footsteps as he descended towards
their dungeons, and happily, never failed of being prepared for his
coming. The fresh earth excavated during their present work, and which
would have entirely blocked up the old passage, was thrown, by degrees
and with the utmost precaution, out of the window in either Faria's or
Dantès' cell, the rubbish being first pulverized so finely that the
night wind carried it far away without permitting the smallest trace to
remain. More than a year had been consumed in this undertaking, the only
tools for which had been a chisel, a knife, and a wooden lever; Faria
still continuing to instruct Dantès by conversing with him, sometimes in
one language, sometimes in another; at others, relating to him the
history of nations and great men who from time to time have risen to
fame and trodden the path of glory.

The abbé was a man of the world, and had, moreover, mixed in the first
society of the day; he wore an air of melancholy dignity which Dantès,
thanks to the imitative powers bestowed on him by nature, easily
acquired, as well as that outward polish and politeness he had before
been wanting in, and which is seldom possessed except by those who have
been placed in constant intercourse with persons of high birth and
breeding. At the end of fifteen months the level was finished, and the
excavation completed beneath the gallery, and the two workmen could
distinctly hear the measured tread of the sentinel as he paced to and
fro over their heads.

Compelled, as they were, to await a night sufficiently dark to favor
their flight, they were obliged to defer their final attempt till that
auspicious moment should arrive; their greatest dread now was lest the
stone through which the sentry was doomed to fall should give way before
its right time, and this they had in some measure provided against by
propping it up with a small beam which they had discovered in the walls
through which they had worked their way. Dantès was occupied in
arranging this piece of wood when he heard Faria, who had remained in
Edmond's cell for the purpose of cutting a peg to secure their rope-
ladder, call to him in a tone indicative of great suffering. Dantès
hastened to his dungeon, where he found him standing in the middle of
the room, pale as death, his forehead streaming with perspiration, and
his hands clenched tightly together.

"Gracious heavens!" exclaimed Dantès, "what is the matter? what has
happened?"

"Quick! quick!" returned the abbé, "listen to what I have to say."
Dantès looked in fear and wonder at the livid countenance of Faria,
whose eyes, already dull and sunken, were surrounded by purple circles,
while his lips were white as those of a corpse, and his very hair seemed
to stand on end.

"Tell me, I beseech you, what ails you?" cried Dantès, letting his
chisel fall to the floor.

"Alas," faltered out the abbé, "all is over with me. I am seized with a
terrible, perhaps mortal illness; I can feel that the paroxysm is fast
approaching. I had a similar attack the year previous to my
imprisonment. This malady admits but of one remedy; I will tell you what
that is. Go into my cell as quickly as you can; draw out one of the feet
that support the bed; you will find it has been hollowed out for the
purpose of containing a small phial you will see there half-filled with
a red-looking fluid. Bring it to me--or rather--no, no!--I may be found
here, therefore help me back to my room while I have the strength to
drag myself along. Who knows what may happen, or how long the attack may
last?"

In spite of the magnitude of the misfortune which thus suddenly
frustrated his hopes, Dantès did not lose his presence of mind, but
descended into the passage, dragging his unfortunate companion with him;
then, half-carrying, half-supporting him, he managed to reach the abbé's
chamber, when he immediately laid the sufferer on his bed.
