Tunis and Palermo, proving thereby how largely his circle of
acquaintances extended.

But however the mind of the young man might be absorbed in these
reflections, they were at once dispersed at the sight of the dark
frowning ruins of the stupendous Colosseum, through the various openings
of which the pale moonlight played and flickered like the unearthly
gleam from the eyes of the wandering dead. The carriage stopped near the
Meta Sudans; the door was opened, and the young men, eagerly alighting,
found themselves opposite a _cicerone_, who appeared to have sprung up
from the ground, so unexpected was his appearance.

The usual guide from the hotel having followed them, they had paid two
conductors, nor is it possible, at Rome, to avoid this abundant supply
of guides; besides the ordinary _cicerone_, who seizes upon you directly
you set foot in your hotel, and never quits you while you remain in the
city, there is also a special _cicerone_ belonging to each monument--
nay, almost to each part of a monument. It may, therefore, be easily
imagined there is no scarcity of guides at the Colosseum, that wonder of
all ages, which Martial thus eulogizes:

"Let Memphis cease to boast the barbarous miracles of her pyramids, and
the wonders of Babylon be talked of no more among us; all must bow to
the superiority of the gigantic labor of the Cæsars, and the many voices
of Fame spread far and wide the surpassing merits of this incomparable
monument."

As for Albert and Franz, they essayed not to escape from their
_ciceronian_ tyrants; and, indeed, it would have been so much the more
difficult to break their bondage, as the guides alone are permitted to
visit these monuments with torches in their hands. Thus, then, the young
men made no attempt at resistance, but blindly and confidingly
surrendered themselves into the care and custody of their conductors.

Franz had already made seven or eight similar excursions to the
Colosseum, while his less favored companion trod for the first time in
his life the classic ground forming the monument of Flavius Vespasian;
and, to his credit be it spoken, his mind, even amid the glib loquacity
of the guides, was duly and deeply touched with awe and enthusiastic
admiration of all he saw; and certainly no adequate notion of these
stupendous ruins can be formed save by such as have visited them, and
more especially by moonlight, at which time the vast proportions of the
building appear twice as large when viewed by the mysterious beams of a
southern moonlit sky, whose rays are sufficiently clear and vivid to
light the horizon with a glow equal to the soft twilight of an eastern
clime.

Scarcely, therefore, had the reflective Franz walked a hundred steps
beneath the interior porticoes of the ruin, than, abandoning Albert to
the guides (who would by no means yield their prescriptive right of
carrying their victims through the routine regularly laid down, and as
regularly followed by them, but dragged the unconscious visitor to the
various objects with a pertinacity that admitted of no appeal,
beginning, as a matter of course, with the "Lions' Den", the "Hall of
the Gladiators" and finishing with "Cæsar's Podium"), to escape a jargon
and mechanical survey of the wonders by which he was surrounded, Franz
ascended a half-dilapidated staircase, and, leaving them to follow their
monotonous round, seated himself at the foot of a column, and
immediately opposite a large aperture, which permitted him to enjoy a
full and undisturbed view of the gigantic dimensions of the majestic
ruin.

Franz had remained for nearly a quarter of an hour perfectly hidden by
the shadow of the vast column at whose base he had found a resting-
place, and from whence his eyes followed the motions of Albert and his
guides, who, holding torches in their hands, had emerged from a
vomitorium at the opposite extremity of the Colosseum, and then again
disappeared down the steps conducting to the seats reserved for the
Vestal virgins, resembling, as they glided along, some restless shades
following the flickering glare of so many _ignes-fatui_. All at once his
ear caught a sound resembling that of a stone rolling down the staircase
opposite the one by which he had himself ascended. There was nothing
remarkable in the circumstance of a fragment of granite giving way and
falling heavily below; but it seemed to him that the substance that fell
gave way beneath the pressure of a foot, and also that someone, who
endeavored as much as possible to prevent his footsteps from being
heard, was approaching the spot where he sat. Conjecture soon became
certainty, for the figure of a man was distinctly visible to Franz,
gradually emerging from the staircase opposite, upon which the moon was
at that moment pouring a full tide of silvery brightness.

The stranger thus presenting himself was probably a person who, like
Franz, preferred the enjoyment of solitude and his own thoughts to the
frivolous gabble of the guides. And his appearance had nothing
extraordinary in it; but the hesitation with which he proceeded,
stopping and listening with anxious attention at every step he took,
convinced Franz that he expected the arrival of some person. By a sort
of instinctive impulse, Franz withdrew as much as possible behind his
pillar.

About ten feet from the spot where he and the stranger were, the roof
had given way, leaving a large round opening, through which might be
seen the blue vault of heaven, thickly studded with stars.

Around this opening, which had, possibly, for ages permitted a free
entrance to the brilliant moonbeams that now illumined the vast pile,
grew a quantity of creeping plants, whose delicate green branches stood
out in bold relief against the clear azure of the firmament, while large
masses of thick, strong fibrous shoots forced their way through the
chasm, and hung floating to and fro, like so many waving strings.

The person whose mysterious arrival had attracted the attention of Franz
stood in a kind of half-light, that rendered it impossible to
distinguish his features, although his dress was easily made out. He
wore a large brown mantle, one fold of which, thrown over his left
shoulder, served likewise to mask the lower part of his countenance,
while the upper part was completely hidden by his broad-brimmed hat. The
lower part of his dress was more distinctly visible by the bright rays
of the moon, which, entering through the broken ceiling, shed their
refulgent beams on feet cased in elegantly made boots of polished
leather, over which descended fashionably cut trousers of black cloth.


From the imperfect means Franz had of judging, he could only come to one
conclusion,--that the person whom he was thus watching certainly
belonged to no inferior station of life.

Some few minutes had elapsed, and the stranger began to show manifest
signs of impatience, when a slight noise was heard outside the aperture
in the roof, and almost immediately a dark shadow seemed to obstruct the
flood of light that had entered it, and the figure of a man was clearly
seen gazing with eager scrutiny on the immense space beneath him; then,
as his eye caught sight of him in the mantle, he grasped a floating mass
of thickly matted boughs, and glided down by their help to within three
or four feet of the ground, and then leaped lightly on his feet. The man
who had performed this daring act with so much indifference wore the
Transtevere costume.

"I beg your excellency's pardon for keeping you waiting," said the man,
in the Roman dialect, "but I don't think I'm many minutes after my time,
ten o'clock has just struck by the clock of Saint John Lateran."

"Say not a word about being late," replied the stranger in purest
Tuscan; "'tis I who am too soon. But even if you had caused me to wait a
little while, I should have felt quite sure that the delay was not
occasioned by any fault of yours."

"Your excellency is perfectly right in so thinking," said the man; "I
came here direct from the Castle of St. Angelo, and I had an immense
deal of trouble before I could get a chance to speak to Beppo."

"And who is Beppo?"

"Oh, Beppo is employed in the prison, and I give him so much a year to
let me know what is going on within his holiness's castle."

"Indeed! You are a provident person, I see."

"Why, you see, no one knows what may happen. Perhaps some of these days
I may be entrapped, like poor Peppino and may be very glad to have some
little nibbling mouse to gnaw the meshes of my net, and so help me out
of prison."

"Briefly, what did you learn?"

"That two executions of considerable interest will take place the day
after tomorrow at two o'clock, as is customary at Rome at the
commencement of all great festivals. One of the culprits will be
_mazzolato_; [*] he is an atrocious villain, who murdered the priest who
brought him up, and deserves not the smallest pity. The other sufferer
is sentenced to be _decapitato_; [**] and he, your excellency, is poor
Peppino."


* Knocked on the head.

** Beheaded.

"The fact is, that you have inspired not only the pontifical government,
but also the neighboring states, with such extreme fear, that they are
glad of all opportunity of making an example."

"But Peppino did not even belong to my band: he was merely a poor
shepherd, whose only crime consisted in furnishing us with provisions."

"Which makes him your accomplice to all intents and purposes. But mark
the distinction with which he is treated; instead of being knocked on
the head as you would be if once they caught hold of you, he is simply
sentenced to be guillotined, by which means, too, the amusements of the
day are diversified, and there is a spectacle to please every
spectator."

"Without reckoning the wholly unexpected one I am preparing to surprise
them with."

"My good friend," said the man in the cloak, "excuse me for saying that
you seem to me precisely in the mood to commit some wild or extravagant
act."

"Perhaps I am; but one thing I have resolved on, and that is, to stop at
nothing to restore a poor devil to liberty, who has got into this scrape
solely from having served me. I should hate and despise myself as a
coward did I desert the brave fellow in his present extremity."

"And what do you mean to do?"

"To surround the scaffold with twenty of my best men, who, at a signal
from me, will rush forward directly Peppino is brought for execution,
and, by the assistance of their stilettos, drive back the guard, and
carry off the prisoner."
