
"_O peccato!_"

"You must know that in France they are very particular on these points;
it is not sufficient, as in Italy, to go to the priest and say, 'We love
each other, and want you to marry us.' Marriage is a civil affair in
France, and in order to marry in an orthodox manner you must have papers
which undeniably establish your identity."

"That is the misfortune! You see I have not these necessary papers."

"Fortunately, I have them, though," said Monte Cristo.

"You?"

"Yes."

"You have them?"

"I have them."

"Ah, indeed?" said the major, who, seeing the object of his journey
frustrated by the absence of the papers, feared also that his
forgetfulness might give rise to some difficulty concerning the 48,000
francs--"ah, indeed, that is a fortunate circumstance; yes, that really
is lucky, for it never occurred to me to bring them."

"I do not at all wonder at it--one cannot think of everything; but,
happily, the Abbé Busoni thought for you."

"He is an excellent person."

"He is extremely prudent and thoughtful."

"He is an admirable man," said the major; "and he sent them to you?"

"Here they are."

The major clasped his hands in token of admiration. "You married Oliva
Corsinari in the church of San Paolo del Monte-Cattini; here is the
priest's certificate."

"Yes indeed, there it is truly," said the Italian, looking on with
astonishment.

"And here is Andrea Cavalcanti's baptismal register, given by the curé
of Saravezza."

"All quite correct."

"Take these documents, then; they do not concern me. You will give them
to your son, who will, of course, take great care of them."

"I should think so, indeed! If he were to lose them----"

"Well, and if he were to lose them?" said Monte Cristo.

"In that case," replied the major, "it would be necessary to write to
the curé for duplicates, and it would be some time before they could be
obtained."

"It would be a difficult matter to arrange," said Monte Cristo.

"Almost an impossibility," replied the major.

"I am very glad to see that you understand the value of these papers."

"I regard them as invaluable."

"Now," said Monte Cristo "as to the mother of the young man----"

"As to the mother of the young man----" repeated the Italian, with
anxiety.

"As regards the Marchesa Corsinari----"

"Really," said the major, "difficulties seem to thicken upon us; will
she be wanted in any way?"

"No, sir," replied Monte Cristo; "besides, has she not----"

"Yes, sir," said the major, "she has----"

"Paid the last debt of nature?"


"Alas, yes," returned the Italian.

"I knew that," said Monte Cristo; "she has been dead these ten years."

"And I am still mourning her loss," exclaimed the major, drawing from
his pocket a checked handkerchief, and alternately wiping first the left
and then the right eye.

"What would you have?" said Monte Cristo; "we are all mortal. Now, you
understand, my dear Monsieur Cavalcanti, that it is useless for you to
tell people in France that you have been separated from your son for
fifteen years. Stories of gypsies, who steal children, are not at all in
vogue in this part of the world, and would not be believed. You sent him
for his education to a college in one of the provinces, and now you wish
him to complete his education in the Parisian world. That is the reason
which has induced you to leave Via Reggio, where you have lived since
the death of your wife. That will be sufficient."

"You think so?"

"Certainly."

"Very well, then."

"If they should hear of the separation----"

"Ah, yes; what could I say?"

"That an unfaithful tutor, bought over by the enemies of your family----
"

"By the Corsinari?"

"Precisely. Had stolen away this child, in order that your name might
become extinct."

"That is reasonable, since he is an only son."

"Well, now that all is arranged, do not let these newly awakened
remembrances be forgotten. You have, doubtless, already guessed that I
was preparing a surprise for you?"

"An agreeable one?" asked the Italian.

"Ah, I see the eye of a father is no more to be deceived than his
heart."

"Hum!" said the major.

"Someone has told you the secret; or, perhaps, you guessed that he was
here."

"That who was here?"

"Your child--your son--your Andrea!"

"I did guess it," replied the major with the greatest possible coolness.
"Then he is here?"

"He is," said Monte Cristo; "when the valet de chambre came in just now,
he told me of his arrival."

"Ah, very well, very well," said the major, clutching the buttons of his
coat at each exclamation.

"My dear sir," said Monte Cristo, "I understand your emotion; you must
have time to recover yourself. I will, in the meantime, go and prepare
the young man for this much-desired interview, for I presume that he is
not less impatient for it than yourself."

"I should quite imagine that to be the case," said Cavalcanti.

"Well, in a quarter of an hour he shall be with you."

"You will bring him, then? You carry your goodness so far as even to
present him to me yourself?"

"No; I do not wish to come between a father and son. Your interview will
be private. But do not be uneasy; even if the powerful voice of nature
should be silent, you cannot well mistake him; he will enter by this
door. He is a fine young man, of fair complexion--a little too fair,
perhaps--pleasing in manners; but you will see and judge for yourself."

"By the way," said the major, "you know I have only the 2,000 francs
which the Abbé Busoni sent me; this sum I have expended upon travelling
expenses, and----"

"And you want money; that is a matter of course, my dear M. Cavalcanti.
Well, here are 8,000 francs on account."

The major's eyes sparkled brilliantly.

"It is 40,000 francs which I now owe you," said Monte Cristo.

"Does your excellency wish for a receipt?" said the major, at the same
time slipping the money into the inner pocket of his coat.

"For what?" said the count.

"I thought you might want it to show the Abbé Busoni."

"Well, when you receive the remaining 40,000, you shall give me a
receipt in full. Between honest men such excessive precaution is, I
think, quite unnecessary."

"Yes, so it is, between perfectly upright people."

"One word more," said Monte Cristo.

"Say on."

"You will permit me to make one remark?"

"Certainly; pray do so."
