are afraid I shall be unhappy?"

"Yes."

"You do not like M. Franz?" The eyes repeated several times, "No, no,
no."

"Then you are vexed with the engagement?"

"Yes."

"Well, listen," said Valentine, throwing herself on her knees, and
putting her arm round her grandfather's neck, "I am vexed, too, for I do
not love M. Franz d'Epinay." An expression of intense joy illumined the
old man's eyes. "When I wished to retire into a convent, you remember
how angry you were with me?" A tear trembled in the eye of the invalid.
"Well," continued Valentine, "the reason of my proposing it was that I
might escape this hateful marriage, which drives me to despair."
Noirtier's breathing came thick and short. "Then the idea of this
marriage really grieves you too? Ah, if you could but help me--if we
could both together defeat their plan! But you are unable to oppose
them,--you, whose mind is so quick, and whose will is so firm are
nevertheless, as weak and unequal to the contest as I am myself. Alas,
you, who would have been such a powerful protector to me in the days of
your health and strength, can now only sympathize in my joys and
sorrows, without being able to take any active part in them. However,
this is much, and calls for gratitude and heaven has not taken away all
my blessings when it leaves me your sympathy and kindness."

At these words there appeared in Noirtier's eye an expression of such
deep meaning that the young girl thought she could read these words
there: "You are mistaken; I can still do much for you."

"Do you think you can help me, dear grandpapa?" said Valentine.

"Yes." Noirtier raised his eyes, it was the sign agreed on between him
and Valentine when he wanted anything.

"What is it you want, dear grandpapa?" said Valentine, and she
endeavored to recall to mind all the things which he would be likely to
need; and as the ideas presented themselves to her mind, she repeated
them aloud, then,--finding that all her efforts elicited nothing but a
constant _"No,"_--she said, "Come, since this plan does not answer, I
will have recourse to another." She then recited all the letters of the
alphabet from A down to N. When she arrived at that letter the paralytic
made her understand that she had spoken the initial letter of the thing
he wanted. "Ah," said Valentine, "the thing you desire begins with the
letter N; it is with N that we have to do, then. Well, let me see, what
can you want that begins with N? Na--Ne--Ni--No"--

"Yes, yes, yes," said the old man's eye.

"Ah, it is No, then?"

"Yes." Valentine fetched a dictionary, which she placed on a desk before
Noirtier; she opened it, and, seeing that the odd man's eye was
thoroughly fixed on its pages, she ran her finger quickly up and down
the columns. During the six years which had passed since Noirtier first
fell into this sad state, Valentine's powers of invention had been too
often put to the test not to render her expert in devising expedients
for gaining a knowledge of his wishes, and the constant practice had so
perfected her in the art that she guessed the old man's meaning as
quickly as if he himself had been able to seek for what he wanted. At
the word _Notary_, Noirtier made a sign to her to stop.

"Notary," said she, "do you want a notary, dear grandpapa?" The old man
again signified that it was a notary he desired.


"You would wish a notary to be sent for then?" said Valentine.

"Yes."

"Shall my father be informed of your wish?"

"Yes."

"Do you wish the notary to be sent for immediately?"

"Yes."

"Then they shall go for him directly, dear grandpapa. Is that all you
want?"

"Yes." Valentine rang the bell, and ordered the servant to tell Monsieur
or Madame de Villefort that they were requested to come to M. Noirtier's
room. "Are you satisfied now?" inquired Valentine.

"Yes."

"I am sure you are; it is not very difficult to discover that,"--and the
young girl smiled on her grandfather, as if he had been a child. M. de
Villefort entered, followed by Barrois. "What do you want me for, sir?"
demanded he of the paralytic.

"Sir," said Valentine, "my grandfather wishes for a notary." At this
strange and unexpected demand M. de Villefort and his father exchanged
looks. "Yes," motioned the latter, with a firmness which seemed to
declare that with the help of Valentine and his old servant, who both
knew what his wishes were, he was quite prepared to maintain the
contest. "Do you wish for a notary?" asked Villefort.

"Yes."

"What to do?"

Noirtier made no answer. "What do you want with a notary?" again
repeated Villefort. The invalid's eye remained fixed, by which
expression he intended to intimate that his resolution was unalterable.
"Is it to do us some ill turn? Do you think it is worth while?" said
Villefort.

"Still," said Barrois, with the freedom and fidelity of an old servant,
"if M. Noirtier asks for a notary, I suppose he really wishes for a
notary; therefore I shall go at once and fetch one." Barrois
acknowledged no master but Noirtier, and never allowed his desires in
any way to be contradicted.


"Yes, I do want a notary," motioned the old man, shutting his eyes with
a look of defiance, which seemed to say, "and I should like to see the
person who dares to refuse my request."

"You shall have a notary, as you absolutely wish for one, sir," said
Villefort; "but I shall explain to him your state of health, and make
excuses for you, for the scene cannot fail of being a most ridiculous
one."

"Never mind that," said Barrois; "I shall go and fetch a notary,
nevertheless,"--and the old servant departed triumphantly on his
mission.



Chapter 59. The Will

As soon as Barrois had left the room, Noirtier looked at Valentine with
a malicious expression that said many things. The young girl perfectly
understood the look, and so did Villefort, for his countenance became
clouded, and he knitted his eyebrows angrily. He took a seat, and
quietly awaited the arrival of the notary. Noirtier saw him seat himself
with an appearance of perfect indifference, at the same time giving a
side look at Valentine, which made her understand that she also was to
remain in the room. Three-quarters of an hour after, Barrois returned,
bringing the notary with him. "Sir," said Villefort, after the first
salutations were over, "you were sent for by M. Noirtier, whom you see
here. All his limbs have become completely paralysed, he has lost his
voice also, and we ourselves find much trouble in endeavoring to catch
some fragments of his meaning." Noirtier cast an appealing look on
Valentine, which look was at once so earnest and imperative, that she
answered immediately. "Sir," said she, "I perfectly understand my
grandfather's meaning at all times."

"That is quite true," said Barrois; "and that is what I told the
gentleman as we walked along."

"Permit me," said the notary, turning first to Villefort and then to
Valentine--"permit me to state that the case in question is just one of
those in which a public officer like myself cannot proceed to act
without thereby incurring a dangerous responsibility. The first thing
necessary to render an act valid is, that the notary should be
thoroughly convinced that he has faithfully interpreted the will and
wishes of the person dictating the act. Now I cannot be sure of the
approbation or disapprobation of a client who cannot speak, and as the
object of his desire or his repugnance cannot be clearly proved to me,
on account of his want of speech, my services here would be quite
useless, and cannot be legally exercised." The notary then prepared to
retire. An imperceptible smile of triumph was expressed on the lips of
the procureur. Noirtier looked at Valentine with an expression so full
of grief, that she arrested the departure of the notary. "Sir," said
she, "the language which I speak with my grandfather may be easily
learnt, and I can teach you in a few minutes, to understand it almost as
well as I can myself. Will you tell me what you require, in order to set
your conscience quite at ease on the subject?"

"In order to render an act valid, I must be certain of the approbation
or disapprobation of my client. Illness of body would not affect the
validity of the deed, but sanity of mind is absolutely requisite."

"Well, sir, by the help of two signs, with which I will acquaint you
presently, you may ascertain with perfect certainty that my grandfather
is still in the full possession of all his mental faculties. M.
Noirtier, being deprived of voice and motion, is accustomed to convey
his meaning by closing his eyes when he wishes to signify 'yes,' and to
wink when he means 'no.' You now know quite enough to enable you to
converse with M. Noirtier;--try." Noirtier gave Valentine such a look of
tenderness and gratitude that it was comprehended even by the notary
himself. "You have heard and understood what your granddaughter has been
saying, sir, have you?" asked the notary. Noirtier closed his eyes. "And
you approve of what she said--that is to say, you declare that the signs
which she mentioned are really those by means of which you are
accustomed to convey your thoughts?"

"Yes."

"It was you who sent for me?"

"Yes."

"To make your will?"
