Franz may, after all, die before that time, a thunderbolt may fall even
on the altar as you approach it,--nothing appears impossible to one
condemned to die, and miracles appear quite reasonable when his escape
from death is concerned. I will, then, wait until the last moment, and
when my misery is certain, irremediable, hopeless, I will write a
confidential letter to my brother-in-law, another to the prefect of
police, to acquaint them with my intention, and at the corner of some
wood, on the brink of some abyss, on the bank of some river, I will put
an end to my existence, as certainly as I am the son of the most honest
man who ever lived in France."


Valentine trembled convulsively; she loosened her hold of the gate, her
arms fell by her side, and two large tears rolled down her cheeks. The
young man stood before her, sorrowful and resolute. "Oh, for pity's
sake," said she, "you will live, will you not?"

"No, on my honor," said Maximilian; "but that will not affect you. You
have done your duty, and your conscience will be at rest." Valentine
fell on her knees, and pressed her almost bursting heart. "Maximilian,"
said she, "Maximilian, my friend, my brother on earth, my true husband
in heaven, I entreat you, do as I do, live in suffering; perhaps we may
one day be united."

"Adieu, Valentine," repeated Morrel.

"My God," said Valentine, raising both her hands to heaven with a
sublime expression, "I have done my utmost to remain a submissive
daughter; I have begged, entreated, implored; he has regarded neither my
prayers, my entreaties, nor my tears. It is done," cried she, wiping
away her tears, and resuming her firmness, "I am resolved not to die of
remorse, but rather of shame. Live, Maximilian, and I will be yours. Say
when shall it be? Speak, command, I will obey." Morrel, who had already
gone some few steps away, again returned, and pale with joy extended
both hands towards Valentine through the opening. "Valentine," said he,
"dear Valentine, you must not speak thus--rather let me die. Why should
I obtain you by violence, if our love is mutual? Is it from mere
humanity you bid me live? I would then rather die."

"Truly," murmured Valentine, "who on this earth cares for me, if he does
not? Who has consoled me in my sorrow but he? On whom do my hopes rest?
On whom does my bleeding heart repose? On him, on him, always on him!
Yes, you are right, Maximilian, I will follow you. I will leave the
paternal home, I will give up all. Oh, ungrateful girl that I am," cried
Valentine, sobbing, "I will give up all, even my dear old grandfather,
whom I had nearly forgotten."

"No," said Maximilian, "you shall not leave him. M. Noirtier has
evinced, you say, a kind feeling towards me. Well, before you leave,
tell him all; his consent would be your justification in God's sight. As
soon as we are married, he shall come and live with us, instead of one
child, he shall have two. You have told me how you talk to him and how
he answers you; I shall very soon learn that language by signs,
Valentine, and I promise you solemnly, that instead of despair, it is
happiness that awaits us."

"Oh, see, Maximilian, see the power you have over me, you almost make me
believe you; and yet, what you tell me is madness, for my father will
curse me--he is inflexible--he will never pardon me. Now listen to me,
Maximilian; if by artifice, by entreaty, by accident--in short, if by
any means I can delay this marriage, will you wait?"

"Yes, I promise you, as faithfully as you have promised me that this
horrible marriage shall not take place, and that if you are dragged
before a magistrate or a priest, you will refuse."

"I promise you by all that is most sacred to me in the world, namely, by
my mother."

"We will wait, then," said Morrel.

"Yes, we will wait," replied Valentine, who revived at these words;
"there are so many things which may save unhappy beings such as we are."

"I rely on you, Valentine," said Morrel; "all you do will be well done;
only if they disregard your prayers, if your father and Madame de Saint-
Méran insist that M. d'Epinay should be called tomorrow to sign the
contract----"

"Then you have my promise, Maximilian."

"Instead of signing----"

"I will go to you, and we will fly; but from this moment until then, let
us not tempt Providence, let us not see each other. It is a miracle, it
is a providence that we have not been discovered. If we were surprised,
if it were known that we met thus, we should have no further resource."

"You are right, Valentine; but how shall I ascertain?"

"From the notary, M. Deschamps."

"I know him."

"And for myself--I will write to you, depend on me. I dread this
marriage, Maximilian, as much as you."

"Thank you, my adored Valentine, thank you; that is enough. When once I
know the hour, I will hasten to this spot, you can easily get over this
fence with my assistance, a carriage will await us at the gate, in which
you will accompany me to my sister's; there living, retired or mingling
in society, as you wish, we shall be enabled to use our power to resist
oppression, and not suffer ourselves to be put to death like sheep,
which only defend themselves by sighs."

"Yes," said Valentine, "I will now acknowledge you are right,
Maximilian; and now are you satisfied with your betrothal?" said the
young girl sorrowfully.

"My adored Valentine, words cannot express one half of my satisfaction."
Valentine had approached, or rather, had placed her lips so near the
fence, that they nearly touched those of Morrel, which were pressed
against the other side of the cold and inexorable barrier. "Adieu, then,
till we meet again," said Valentine, tearing herself away. "I shall hear
from you?"

"Yes."

"Thanks, thanks, dear love, adieu!" The sound of a kiss was heard, and
Valentine fled through the avenue. Morrel listened to catch the last
sound of her dress brushing the branches, and of her footstep on the
gravel, then raised his eyes with an ineffable smile of thankfulness to
heaven for being permitted to be thus loved, and then also disappeared.
The young man returned home and waited all the evening and all the next
day without getting any message. It was only on the following day, at
about ten o'clock in the morning, as he was starting to call on M.
Deschamps, the notary, that he received from the postman a small billet,
which he knew to be from Valentine, although he had not before seen her
writing. It was to this effect:--

"Tears, entreaties, prayers, have availed me nothing. Yesterday, for two
hours, I was at the church of Saint-Phillippe du Roule, and for two
hours I prayed most fervently. Heaven is as inflexible as man, and the
signature of the contract is fixed for this evening at nine o'clock. I
have but one promise and but one heart to give; that promise is pledged
to you, that heart is also yours. This evening, then, at a quarter to
nine at the gate.

"Your betrothed,

"Valentine de Villefort."

"P.S.--My poor grandmother gets worse and worse; yesterday her fever
amounted to delirium; today her delirium is almost madness. You will be
very kind to me, will you not, Morrel, to make me forget my sorrow in
leaving her thus? I think it is kept a secret from grandpapa Noirtier,
that the contract is to be signed this evening."

Morrel went also to the notary, who confirmed the news that the contract
was to be signed that evening. Then he went to call on Monte Cristo and
heard still more. Franz had been to announce the ceremony, and Madame de
Villefort had also written to beg the count to excuse her not inviting
him; the death of M. de Saint-Méran and the dangerous illness of his
widow would cast a gloom over the meeting which she would regret should
be shared by the count whom she wished every happiness. The day before
Franz had been presented to Madame de Saint-Méran, who had left her bed
to receive him, but had been obliged to return to it immediately after.
It is easy to suppose that Morrel's agitation would not escape the
count's penetrating eye. Monte Cristo was more affectionate than ever,--
indeed, his manner was so kind that several times Morrel was on the
point of telling him all. But he recalled the promise he had made to
Valentine, and kept his secret.

The young man read Valentine's letter twenty times in the course of the
day. It was her first, and on what an occasion! Each time he read it he
renewed his vow to make her happy. How great is the power of a woman who
has made so courageous a resolution! What devotion does she deserve from
him for whom she has sacrificed everything! How ought she really to be
supremely loved! She becomes at once a queen and a wife, and it is
impossible to thank and love her sufficiently. Morrel longed intensely
for the moment when he should hear Valentine say, "Here I am,
Maximilian; come and help me." He had arranged everything for her
escape; two ladders were hidden in the clover-field; a cabriolet was
ordered for Maximilian alone, without a servant, without lights; at the
turning of the first street they would light the lamps, as it would be
foolish to attract the notice of the police by too many precautions.
Occasionally he shuddered; he thought of the moment when, from the top
of that wall, he should protect the descent of his dear Valentine,
pressing in his arms for the first time her of whom he had yet only
kissed the delicate hand.

When the afternoon arrived and he felt that the hour was drawing near,
he wished for solitude, his agitation was extreme; a simple question
from a friend would have irritated him. He shut himself in his room, and
tried to read, but his eye glanced over the page without understanding a
word, and he threw away the book, and for the second time sat down to
sketch his plan, the ladders and the fence.

At length the hour drew near. Never did a man deeply in love allow the
clocks to go on peacefully. Morrel tormented his so effectually that
they struck eight at half-past six. He then said, "It is time to start;
the signature was indeed fixed to take place at nine o'clock, but
perhaps Valentine will not wait for that." Consequently, Morrel, having
left the Rue Meslay at half-past eight by his timepiece, entered the
clover-field while the clock of Saint-Phillippe du Roule was striking
eight. The horse and cabriolet were concealed behind a small ruin, where
Morrel had often waited.

The night gradually drew on, and the foliage in the garden assumed a
deeper hue. Then Morrel came out from his hiding-place with a beating
