Danglars. "We were merely joking; drink to his health," he added,
filling Caderousse's glass, "and do not interfere with us."

"Yes, yes, Dantès' good health!" said Caderousse, emptying his glass,
"here's to his health! his health--hurrah!"

"But the means--the means?" said Fernand.

"Have you not hit upon any?" asked Danglars.

"No!--you undertook to do so."

"True," replied Danglars; "the French have the superiority over the
Spaniards, that the Spaniards ruminate, while the French invent."

"Do you invent, then," said Fernand impatiently.

"Waiter," said Danglars, "pen, ink, and paper."

"Pen, ink, and paper," muttered Fernand.

"Yes; I am a supercargo; pen, ink, and paper are my tools, and without
my tools I am fit for nothing."

"Pen, ink, and paper, then," called Fernand loudly.

"There's what you want on that table," said the waiter.

"Bring them here." The waiter did as he was desired.


"When one thinks," said Caderousse, letting his hand drop on the paper,
"there is here wherewithal to kill a man more sure than if we waited at
the corner of a wood to assassinate him! I have always had more dread of
a pen, a bottle of ink, and a sheet of paper, than of a sword or
pistol."

"The fellow is not so drunk as he appears to be," said Danglars. "Give
him some more wine, Fernand." Fernand filled Caderousse's glass, who,
like the confirmed toper he was, lifted his hand from the paper and
seized the glass.

The Catalan watched him until Caderousse, almost overcome by this fresh
assault on his senses, rested, or rather dropped, his glass upon the
table.

"Well!" resumed the Catalan, as he saw the final glimmer of Caderousse's
reason vanishing before the last glass of wine.

"Well, then, I should say, for instance," resumed Danglars, "that if
after a voyage such as Dantès has just made, in which he touched at the
Island of Elba, someone were to denounce him to the king's procureur as
a Bonapartist agent"--

"I will denounce him!" exclaimed the young man hastily.

"Yes, but they will make you then sign your declaration, and confront
you with him you have denounced; I will supply you with the means of
supporting your accusation, for I know the fact well. But Dantès cannot
remain forever in prison, and one day or other he will leave it, and the
day when he comes out, woe betide him who was the cause of his
incarceration!"

"Oh, I should wish nothing better than that he would come and seek a
quarrel with me."

"Yes, and Mercédès! Mercédès, who will detest you if you have only the
misfortune to scratch the skin of her dearly beloved Edmond!"

"True!" said Fernand.

"No, no," continued Danglars; "if we resolve on such a step, it would be
much better to take, as I now do, this pen, dip it into this ink, and
write with the left hand (that the writing may not be recognized) the
denunciation we propose." And Danglars, uniting practice with theory,
wrote with his left hand, and in a writing reversed from his usual
style, and totally unlike it, the following lines, which he handed to
Fernand, and which Fernand read in an undertone:--

"The honorable, the king's attorney, is informed by a friend of the
throne and religion, that one Edmond Dantès, mate of the ship _Pharaon_,
arrived this morning from Smyrna, after having touched at Naples and
Porto-Ferrajo, has been intrusted by Murat with a letter for the
usurper, and by the usurper with a letter for the Bonapartist committee
in Paris. Proof of this crime will be found on arresting him, for the
letter will be found upon him, or at his father's, or in his cabin on
board the _Pharaon_."

"Very good," resumed Danglars; "now your revenge looks like common
sense, for in no way can it revert to yourself, and the matter will thus
work its own way; there is nothing to do now but fold the letter as I am
doing, and write upon it, 'To the king's attorney,' and that's all
settled." And Danglars wrote the address as he spoke.

"Yes, and that's all settled!" exclaimed Caderousse, who, by a last
effort of intellect, had followed the reading of the letter, and
instinctively comprehended all the misery which such a denunciation must
entail. "Yes, and that's all settled; only it will be an infamous
shame;" and he stretched out his hand to reach the letter.

"Yes," said Danglars, taking it from beyond his reach; "and as what I
say and do is merely in jest, and I, amongst the first and foremost,
should be sorry if anything happened to Dantès--the worthy Dantès--look
here!" And taking the letter, he squeezed it up in his hands and threw
it into a corner of the arbor.

"All right!" said Caderousse. "Dantès is my friend, and I won't have him
ill-used."

"And who thinks of using him ill? Certainly neither I nor Fernand," said
Danglars, rising and looking at the young man, who still remained
seated, but whose eye was fixed on the denunciatory sheet of paper flung
into the corner.

"In this case," replied Caderousse, "let's have some more wine. I wish
to drink to the health of Edmond and the lovely Mercédès."

"You have had too much already, drunkard," said Danglars; "and if you
continue, you will be compelled to sleep here, because unable to stand
on your legs."

"I?" said Caderousse, rising with all the offended dignity of a drunken
man, "I can't keep on my legs? Why, I'll wager I can go up into the
belfry of the Accoules, and without staggering, too!"

"Done!" said Danglars, "I'll take your bet; but tomorrow--today it is
time to return. Give me your arm, and let us go."

"Very well, let us go," said Caderousse; "but I don't want your arm at
all. Come, Fernand, won't you return to Marseilles with us?"

"No," said Fernand; "I shall return to the Catalans."

"You're wrong. Come with us to Marseilles--come along."

"I will not."

"What do you mean? you will not? Well, just as you like, my prince;
there's liberty for all the world. Come along, Danglars, and let the
young gentleman return to the Catalans if he chooses."

Danglars took advantage of Caderousse's temper at the moment, to take
him off towards Marseilles by the Porte Saint-Victor, staggering as he
went.

When they had advanced about twenty yards, Danglars looked back and saw
Fernand stoop, pick up the crumpled paper, and putting it into his
pocket then rush out of the arbor towards Pillon.

"Well," said Caderousse, "why, what a lie he told! He said he was going
to the Catalans, and he is going to the city. Hallo, Fernand!"

"Oh, you don't see straight," said Danglars; "he's gone right enough."

"Well," said Caderousse, "I should have said not--how treacherous wine
is!"

"Come, come," said Danglars to himself, "now the thing is at work and it
will effect its purpose unassisted."



Chapter 5. The Marriage Feast

The morning's sun rose clear and resplendent, touching the foamy waves
into a network of ruby-tinted light.

The feast had been made ready on the second floor at La Réserve, with
whose arbor the reader is already familiar. The apartment destined for
the purpose was spacious and lighted by a number of windows, over each
of which was written in golden letters for some inexplicable reason the
name of one of the principal cities of France; beneath these windows a
wooden balcony extended the entire length of the house. And although the
entertainment was fixed for twelve o'clock, an hour previous to that
time the balcony was filled with impatient and expectant guests,
consisting of the favored part of the crew of the _Pharaon_, and other
personal friends of the bridegroom, the whole of whom had arrayed
themselves in their choicest costumes, in order to do greater honor to
the occasion.

Various rumors were afloat to the effect that the owners of the
_Pharaon_ had promised to attend the nuptial feast; but all seemed
unanimous in doubting that an act of such rare and exceeding
condescension could possibly be intended.

Danglars, however, who now made his appearance, accompanied by
Caderousse, effectually confirmed the report, stating that he had
recently conversed with M. Morrel, who had himself assured him of his
intention to dine at La Réserve.

In fact, a moment later M. Morrel appeared and was saluted with an
enthusiastic burst of applause from the crew of the _Pharaon_, who
hailed the visit of the shipowner as a sure indication that the man
whose wedding feast he thus delighted to honor would ere long be first
in command of the ship; and as Dantès was universally beloved on board
his vessel, the sailors put no restraint on their tumultuous joy at
finding that the opinion and choice of their superiors so exactly
coincided with their own.

With the entrance of M. Morrel, Danglars and Caderousse were despatched
