each other with unutterable surprise.

"But do you think," asked Albert, "that we ought to accept such offers
from a perfect stranger?"

"What sort of person is this Count of Monte Cristo?" asked Franz of his
host.

"A very great nobleman, but whether Maltese or Sicilian I cannot exactly
say; but this I know, that he is noble as a Borghese and rich as a gold
mine."

"It seems to me," said Franz, speaking in an undertone to Albert, "that
if this person merited the high panegyrics of our landlord, he would
have conveyed his invitation through another channel, and not permitted
it to be brought to us in this unceremonious way. He would have written-
-or----"

At this instant someone knocked at the door.

"Come in," said Franz.

A servant, wearing a livery of considerable style and richness, appeared
at the threshold, and, placing two cards in the landlord's hands, who
forthwith presented them to the two young men, he said, "Please to
deliver these, from the Count of Monte Cristo to Viscomte Albert de
Morcerf and M. Franz d'Epinay. The Count of Monte Cristo," continued the
servant, "begs these gentlemen's permission to wait upon them as their
neighbor, and he will be honored by an intimation of what time they will
please to receive him."

"Faith, Franz," whispered Albert, "there is not much to find fault with
here."

"Tell the count," replied Franz, "that we will do ourselves the pleasure
of calling on him." The servant bowed and retired.

"That is what I call an elegant mode of attack," said Albert, "You were
quite correct in what you said, Signor Pastrini. The Count of Monte
Cristo is unquestionably a man of first-rate breeding and knowledge of
the world."

"Then you accept his offer?" said the host.

"Of course we do," replied Albert. "Still, I must own I am sorry to be
obliged to give up the cart and the group of reapers--it would have
produced such an effect! And were it not for the windows at the Palazzo
Rospoli, by way of recompense for the loss of our beautiful scheme, I
don't know but what I should have held on by my original plan. What say
you, Franz?"

"Oh, I agree with you; the windows in the Palazzo Rospoli alone decided
me." The truth was, that the mention of two places in the Palazzo
Rospoli had recalled to Franz the conversation he had overheard the
preceding evening in the ruins of the Colosseum between the mysterious
unknown and the Transteverin, in which the stranger in the cloak had
undertaken to obtain the freedom of a condemned criminal; and if this
muffled-up individual proved (as Franz felt sure he would) the same as
the person he had just seen in the Teatro Argentina, then he should be
able to establish his identity, and also to prosecute his researches
respecting him with perfect facility and freedom. Franz passed the night
in confused dreams respecting the two meetings he had already had with
his mysterious tormentor, and in waking speculations as to what the
morrow would produce. The next day must clear up every doubt; and unless
his near neighbor and would-be friend, the Count of Monte Cristo,
possessed the ring of Gyges, and by its power was able to render himself
invisible, it was very certain he could not escape this time. Eight
o'clock found Franz up and dressed, while Albert, who had not the same
motives for early rising, was still soundly asleep. The first act of
Franz was to summon his landlord, who presented himself with his
accustomed obsequiousness.

"Pray, Signor Pastrini," asked Franz, "is not some execution appointed
to take place today?"

"Yes, your excellency; but if your reason for inquiry is that you may
procure a window to view it from, you are much too late."

"Oh, no," answered Franz, "I had no such intention; and even if I had
felt a wish to witness the spectacle, I might have done so from Monte
Pincio--could I not?"

"Ah!" exclaimed mine host, "I did not think it likely your excellency
would have chosen to mingle with such a rabble as are always collected
on that hill, which, indeed, they consider as exclusively belonging to
themselves."

"Very possibly I may not go," answered Franz; "but in case I feel
disposed, give me some particulars of today's executions."

"What particulars would your excellency like to hear?"

"Why, the number of persons condemned to suffer, their names, and
description of the death they are to die."

"That happens just lucky, your excellency! Only a few minutes ago they
brought me the _tavolettas_."

"What are they?"

"Sort of wooden tablets hung up at the corners of streets the evening
before an execution, on which is pasted up a paper containing the names
of the condemned persons, their crimes, and mode of punishment. The
reason for so publicly announcing all this is, that all good and
faithful Catholics may offer up their prayers for the unfortunate
culprits, and, above all, beseech of heaven to grant them a sincere
repentance."

"And these tablets are brought to you that you may add your prayers to
those of the faithful, are they?" asked Franz somewhat incredulously.

"Oh, dear, no, your excellency! I have not time for anybody's affairs
but my own and those of my honorable guests; but I make an agreement
with the man who pastes up the papers, and he brings them to me as he
would the playbills, that in case any person staying at my hotel should
like to witness an execution, he may obtain every requisite information
concerning the time and place etc."

"Upon my word, that is a most delicate attention on your part, Signor
Pastrini," cried Franz.

"Why, your excellency," returned the landlord, chuckling and rubbing his
hands with infinite complacency, "I think I may take upon myself to say
I neglect nothing to deserve the support and patronage of the noble
visitors to this poor hotel."

"I see that plainly enough, my most excellent host, and you may rely
upon me to proclaim so striking a proof of your attention to your guests
wherever I go. Meanwhile, oblige me by a sight of one of these
_tavolettas_."

"Nothing can be easier than to comply with your excellency's wish," said
the landlord, opening the door of the chamber; "I have caused one to be
placed on the landing, close by your apartment." Then, taking the tablet
from the wall, he handed it to Franz, who read as follows:

"'The public is informed that on Wednesday, February 23d, being the
first day of the Carnival, executions will take place in the Piazza del
Popolo, by order of the Tribunal of the Rota, of two persons, named
Andrea Rondolo, and Peppino, otherwise called Rocca Priori; the former
found guilty of the murder of a venerable and exemplary priest, named
Don César Torlini, canon of the church of St. John Lateran; and the
latter convicted of being an accomplice of the atrocious and sanguinary
bandit, Luigi Vampa, and his band. The first-named malefactor will be
_mazzolato_, the second culprit _decapitato_. The prayers of all good
Christians are entreated for these unfortunate men, that it may please
God to awaken them to a sense of their guilt, and to grant them a hearty
and sincere repentance for their crimes.'"

This was precisely what Franz had heard the evening before in the ruins
of the Colosseum. No part of the programme differed,--the names of the
condemned persons, their crimes, and mode of punishment, all agreed with
his previous information. In all probability, therefore, the
Transteverin was no other than the bandit Luigi Vampa himself, and the
man shrouded in the mantle the same he had known as "Sinbad the Sailor,"
but who, no doubt, was still pursuing his philanthropic expedition in
Rome, as he had already done at Porto-Vecchio and Tunis. Time was
getting on, however, and Franz deemed it advisable to awaken Albert; but
at the moment he prepared to proceed to his chamber, his friend entered
the room in perfect costume for the day. The anticipated delights of the
Carnival had so run in his head as to make him leave his pillow long
before his usual hour.

"Now, my excellent Signor Pastrini," said Franz, addressing his
landlord, "since we are both ready, do you think we may proceed at once
to visit the Count of Monte Cristo?"

"Most assuredly," replied he. "The Count of Monte Cristo is always an
early riser; and I can answer for his having been up these two hours."

"Then you really consider we shall not be intruding if we pay our
respects to him directly?"


"Oh, I am quite sure. I will take all the blame on myself if you find I
have led you into an error."

"Well, then, if it be so, are you ready, Albert?"

"Perfectly."

"Let us go and return our best thanks for his courtesy."

"Yes, let us do so." The landlord preceded the friends across the
landing, which was all that separated them from the apartments of the
count, rang at the bell, and, upon the door being opened by a servant,
said, "_I signori Francesi_."

The domestic bowed respectfully, and invited them to enter. They passed
through two rooms, furnished in a luxurious manner they had not expected
to see under the roof of Signor Pastrini, and were shown into an
elegantly fitted-up drawing-room. The richest Turkey carpets covered the
floor, and the softest and most inviting couches, easy-chairs, and
sofas, offered their high-piled and yielding cushions to such as desired
repose or refreshment. Splendid paintings by the first masters were
ranged against the walls, intermingled with magnificent trophies of war,
while heavy curtains of costly tapestry were suspended before the
different doors of the room. "If your excellencies will please to be
seated," said the man, "I will let the count know that you are here."

