"But shutters?"

"Yes, but they are never used. That Count of Monte Cristo is an
original, who loves to look at the sky even at night."

"And where do the servants sleep?"

"Oh, they have a house to themselves. Picture to yourself a pretty
coach-house at the right-hand side where the ladders are kept. Well,
over that coach-house are the servants' rooms, with bells corresponding
with the different apartments."

"Ah, _diable!_ bells did you say?"

"What do you mean?"

"Oh, nothing! I only say they cost a load of money to hang, and what is
the use of them, I should like to know?"

"There used to be a dog let loose in the yard at night, but it has been
taken to the house at Auteuil, to that you went to, you know."

"Yes."

"I was saying to him only yesterday, 'You are imprudent, Monsieur Count;
for when you go to Auteuil and take your servants the house is left
unprotected.' 'Well,' said he, 'what next?' 'Well, next, some day you
will be robbed.'"

"What did he answer?"

"He quietly said, 'What do I care if I am?'"

"Andrea, he has some secretary desk with a spring."

"How do you know?"

"Yes, which catches the thief in a trap and plays a tune. I was told
there were such at the last exhibition."

"He has simply a mahogany secretary desk, in which the key is always
kept."

"And he is not robbed?"

"No; his servants are all devoted to him."

"There ought to be some money in that secretary desk?"

"There may be. No one knows what there is."

"And where is it?"

"On the first floor."

"Sketch me the plan of that floor, as you have done of the ground floor,
my boy."

"That is very simple." Andrea took the pen. "On the first story, do you
see, there is the anteroom and the drawing-room; to the right of the
drawing-room, a library and a study; to the left, a bedroom and a
dressing-room. The famous secretary desk is in the dressing-room."

"Is there a window in the dressing-room?"

"Two,--one here and one there." Andrea sketched two windows in the room,
which formed an angle on the plan, and appeared as a small square added
to the rectangle of the bedroom. Caderousse became thoughtful. "Does he
often go to Auteuil?" added he.

"Two or three times a week. Tomorrow, for instance, he is going to spend
the day and night there."

"Are you sure of it?"

"He has invited me to dine there."

"There's a life for you," said Caderousse; "a town house and a country
house."

"That is what it is to be rich."

"And shall you dine there?"

"Probably."

"When you dine there, do you sleep there?"

"If I like; I am at home there." Caderousse looked at the young man, as
if to get at the truth from the bottom of his heart. But Andrea drew a
cigar-case from his pocket, took a Havana, quietly lit it, and began
smoking. "When do you want your twelve hundred francs?" said he to
Caderousse.

"Now, if you have them." Andrea took five and twenty louis from his
pocket.

"Yellow boys?" said Caderousse; "no, I thank you."

"Oh, you despise them."

"On the contrary, I esteem them, but will not have them."

"You can change them, idiot; gold is worth five sous."

"Exactly; and he who changes them will follow friend Caderousse, lay
hands on him, and demand what farmers pay him their rent in gold. No
nonsense, my good fellow; silver simply, round coins with the head of
some monarch or other on them. Anybody may possess a five-franc piece."

"But do you suppose I carry five hundred francs about with me? I should
want a porter."

"Well, leave them with your porter; he is to be trusted. I will call for
them."

"Today?"

"No, tomorrow; I shall not have time today."

"Well, tomorrow I will leave them when I go to Auteuil."

"May I depend on it?"

"Certainly."

"Because I shall secure my housekeeper on the strength of it."

"Now see here, will that be all? Eh? And will you not torment me any
more?"

"Never." Caderousse had become so gloomy that Andrea feared he should be
obliged to notice the change. He redoubled his gayety and carelessness.
"How sprightly you are," said Caderousse; "One would say you were
already in possession of your property."

"No, unfortunately; but when I do obtain it----"

"Well?"

"I shall remember old friends, I can tell you that."

"Yes, since you have such a good memory."

"What do you want? It looks as if you were trying to fleece me?"

"I? What an idea! I, who am going to give you another piece of good
advice."

"What is it?"

"To leave behind you the diamond you have on your finger. We shall both
get into trouble. You will ruin both yourself and me by your folly."

"How so?" said Andrea.

"How? You put on a livery, you disguise yourself as a servant, and yet
keep a diamond on your finger worth four or five thousand francs."

"You guess well."

"I know something of diamonds; I have had some."

"You do well to boast of it," said Andrea, who, without becoming angry,
as Caderousse feared, at this new extortion, quietly resigned the ring.
Caderousse looked so closely at it that Andrea well knew that he was
examining to see if all the edges were perfect.

"It is a false diamond," said Caderousse.

"You are joking now," replied Andrea.

"Do not be angry, we can try it." Caderousse went to the window, touched
the glass with it, and found it would cut.

"_Confiteor!_" said Caderousse, putting the diamond on his little
finger; "I was mistaken; but those thieves of jewellers imitate so well
that it is no longer worthwhile to rob a jeweller's shop--it is another
branch of industry paralyzed."

"Have you finished?" said Andrea,--"do you want anything more?--will you
have my waistcoat or my hat? Make free, now you have begun."

"No; you are, after all, a good companion; I will not detain you, and
will try to cure myself of my ambition."

"But take care the same thing does not happen to you in selling the
diamond you feared with the gold."

"I shall not sell it--do not fear."

"Not at least till the day after tomorrow," thought the young man.

"Happy rogue," said Caderousse; "you are going to find your servants,
your horses, your carriage, and your betrothed!"

"Yes," said Andrea.

"Well, I hope you will make a handsome wedding-present the day you marry
Mademoiselle Danglars."
