feeling almost amounting to hatred.

"No?" said the notary; "then, perhaps, it is to your son, M. de
Villefort?"

"No." The two notaries looked at each other in mute astonishment and
inquiry as to what were the real intentions of the testator. Villefort
and his wife both grew red, one from shame, the other from anger.

"What have we all done, then, dear grandpapa?" said Valentine; "you no
longer seem to love any of us?" The old man's eyes passed rapidly from
Villefort and his wife, and rested on Valentine with a look of
unutterable fondness. "Well," said she; "if you love me, grandpapa, try
and bring that love to bear upon your actions at this present moment.
You know me well enough to be quite sure that I have never thought of
your fortune; besides, they say I am already rich in right of my mother-
-too rich, even. Explain yourself, then." Noirtier fixed his intelligent
eyes on Valentine's hand.

"My hand?" said she.

"Yes."

"Her hand!" exclaimed everyone.

"Oh, gentlemen, you see it is all useless, and that my father's mind is
really impaired," said Villefort.

"Ah," cried Valentine suddenly, "I understand. It is my marriage you
mean, is it not, dear grandpapa?"

"Yes, yes, yes," signed the paralytic, casting on Valentine a look of
joyful gratitude for having guessed his meaning.

"You are angry with us all on account of this marriage, are you not?"

"Yes?"

"Really, this is too absurd," said Villefort.

"Excuse me, sir," replied the notary; "on the contrary, the meaning of
M. Noirtier is quite evident to me, and I can quite easily connect the
train of ideas passing in his mind."

"You do not wish me to marry M. Franz d'Epinay?" observed Valentine.


"I do not wish it," said the eye of her grandfather.

"And you disinherit your granddaughter," continued the notary, "because
she has contracted an engagement contrary to your wishes?"

"Yes."

"So that, but for this marriage, she would have been your heir?"

"Yes." There was a profound silence. The two notaries were holding a
consultation as to the best means of proceeding with the affair.
Valentine was looking at her grandfather with a smile of intense
gratitude, and Villefort was biting his lips with vexation, while Madame
de Villefort could not succeed in repressing an inward feeling of joy,
which, in spite of herself, appeared in her whole countenance. "But,"
said Villefort, who was the first to break the silence, "I consider that
I am the best judge of the propriety of the marriage in question. I am
the only person possessing the right to dispose of my daughter's hand.
It is my wish that she should marry M. Franz d'Epinay--and she shall
marry him." Valentine sank weeping into a chair.

"Sir," said the notary, "how do you intend disposing of your fortune in
case Mademoiselle de Villefort still determines on marrying M. Franz?"
The old man gave no answer. "You will, of course, dispose of it in some
way or other?"

"Yes."

"In favor of some member of your family?"

"No."

"Do you intend devoting it to charitable purposes, then?" pursued the
notary.

"Yes."

"But," said the notary, "you are aware that the law does not allow a son
to be entirely deprived of his patrimony?"

"Yes."

"You only intend, then, to dispose of that part of your fortune which
the law allows you to subtract from the inheritance of your son?"
Noirtier made no answer. "Do you still wish to dispose of all?"

"Yes."

"But they will contest the will after your death?"

"No."

"My father knows me," replied Villefort; "he is quite sure that his
wishes will be held sacred by me; besides, he understands that in my
position I cannot plead against the poor." The eye of Noirtier beamed
with triumph. "What do you decide on, sir?" asked the notary of
Villefort.

"Nothing, sir; it is a resolution which my father has taken and I know
he never alters his mind. I am quite resigned. These 900,000 francs will
go out of the family in order to enrich some hospital; but it is
ridiculous thus to yield to the caprices of an old man, and I shall,
therefore, act according to my conscience." Having said this, Villefort
quitted the room with his wife, leaving his father at liberty to do as
he pleased. The same day the will was made, the witnesses were brought,
it was approved by the old man, sealed in the presence of all and given
in charge to M. Deschamps, the family notary.



Chapter 60. The Telegraph

M. and Madame de Villefort found on their return that the Count of Monte
Cristo, who had come to visit them in their absence, had been ushered
into the drawing-room, and was still awaiting them there. Madame de
Villefort, who had not yet sufficiently recovered from her late emotion
to allow of her entertaining visitors so immediately, retired to her
bedroom, while the procureur, who could better depend upon himself,
proceeded at once to the salon. Although M. de Villefort flattered
himself that, to all outward view, he had completely masked the feelings
which were passing in his mind, he did not know that the cloud was still
lowering on his brow, so much so that the count, whose smile was
radiant, immediately noticed his sombre and thoughtful air.

"_Ma foi!_" said Monte Cristo, after the first compliments were over,
"what is the matter with you, M. de Villefort? Have I arrived at the
moment when you were drawing up an indictment for a capital crime?"
Villefort tried to smile. "No, count," he replied, "I am the only victim
in this case. It is I who lose my cause, and it is ill-luck, obstinacy,
and folly which have caused it to be decided against me."

"To what do you refer?" said Monte Cristo with well-feigned interest.
"Have you really met with some great misfortune?"

"Oh, no, monsieur," said Villefort with a bitter smile; "it is only a
loss of money which I have sustained--nothing worth mentioning, I assure
you."

"True," said Monte Cristo, "the loss of a sum of money becomes almost
immaterial with a fortune such as you possess, and to one of your
philosophic spirit."


"It is not so much the loss of the money that vexes me," said Villefort,
"though, after all, 900,000 francs are worth regretting; but I am the
more annoyed with this fate, chance, or whatever you please to call the
power which has destroyed my hopes and my fortune, and may blast the
prospects of my child also, as it is all occasioned by an old man
relapsed into second childhood."

"What do you say?" said the count; "900,000 francs? It is indeed a sum
which might be regretted even by a philosopher. And who is the cause of
all this annoyance?"

"My father, as I told you."

"M. Noirtier? But I thought you told me he had become entirely
paralyzed, and that all his faculties were completely destroyed?"

"Yes, his bodily faculties, for he can neither move nor speak,
nevertheless he thinks, acts, and wills in the manner I have described.
I left him about five minutes ago, and he is now occupied in dictating
his will to two notaries."

"But to do this he must have spoken?"

"He has done better than that--he has made himself understood."

"How was such a thing possible?"

"By the help of his eyes, which are still full of life, and, as you
perceive, possess the power of inflicting mortal injury."

"My dear," said Madame de Villefort, who had just entered the room,
"perhaps you exaggerate the evil."

"Good-morning, madame," said the count, bowing. Madame de Villefort
acknowledged the salutation with one of her most gracious smiles. "What
is this that M. de Villefort has been telling me?" demanded Monte Cristo
"and what incomprehensible misfortune----"

"Incomprehensible is not the word," interrupted the procureur, shrugging
his shoulders. "It is an old man's caprice."

"And is there no means of making him revoke his decision?"

"Yes," said Madame de Villefort; "and it is still entirely in the power
of my husband to cause the will, which is now in prejudice of Valentine,
to be altered in her favor." The count, who perceived that M. and Madame
de Villefort were beginning to speak in parables, appeared to pay no
attention to the conversation, and feigned to be busily engaged in
watching Edward, who was mischievously pouring some ink into the bird's
water-glass. "My dear," said Villefort, in answer to his wife, "you know
