which--precursors of the storm--began to play in at the windows. 'Well,'
inquired the jeweller, 'is the cash all right?'

"'Yes,' said Caderousse. 'Give me the pocket-book, La Carconte, and find
a bag somewhere.'

"La Carconte went to a cupboard, and returned with an old leathern
pocket-book and a bag. From the former she took some greasy letters, and
put in their place the bank-notes, and from the bag took two or three
crowns of six livres each, which, in all probability, formed the entire
fortune of the miserable couple. 'There,' said Caderousse; 'and now,
although you have wronged us of perhaps 10,000 francs, will you have
your supper with us? I invite you with good-will.'--'Thank you,' replied
the jeweller, 'it must be getting late, and I must return to Beaucaire--
my wife will be getting uneasy.' He drew out his watch, and exclaimed,
'_Morbleu!_ nearly nine o'clock--why, I shall not get back to Beaucaire
before midnight! Good-night, my friends. If the Abbé Busoni should by
any accident return, think of me.'--'In another week you will have left
Beaucaire,' remarked Caderousse, 'for the fair ends in a few days.'--
'True, but that makes no difference. Write to me at Paris, to M.
Joannes, in the Palais Royal, arcade Pierre, No. 45. I will make the
journey on purpose to see him, if it is worth while.' At this moment
there was a tremendous clap of thunder, accompanied by a flash of
lightning so vivid, that it quite eclipsed the light of the lamp.


"'See here,' exclaimed Caderousse. 'You cannot think of going out in
such weather as this.'--'Oh, I am not afraid of thunder,' said the
jeweller.--'And then there are robbers,' said La Carconte. 'The road is
never very safe during fair time.'--'Oh, as to the robbers,' said
Joannes, 'here is something for them,' and he drew from his pocket a
pair of small pistols, loaded to the muzzle. 'Here,' said he, 'are dogs
who bark and bite at the same time, they are for the two first who shall
have a longing for your diamond, Friend Caderousse.'

"Caderousse and his wife again interchanged a meaning look. It seemed as
though they were both inspired at the same time with some horrible
thought. 'Well, then, a good journey to you,' said Caderousse.--
'Thanks,' replied the jeweller. He then took his cane, which he had
placed against an old cupboard, and went out. At the moment when he
opened the door, such a gust of wind came in that the lamp was nearly
extinguished. 'Oh,' said he, 'this is very nice weather, and two leagues
to go in such a storm.'--'Remain,' said Caderousse. 'You can sleep
here.'--'Yes; do stay,' added La Carconte in a tremulous voice; 'we will
take every care of you.'--'No; I must sleep at Beaucaire. So, once more,
good-night.' Caderousse followed him slowly to the threshold. 'I can see
neither heaven nor earth,' said the jeweller, who was outside the door.
'Do I turn to the right, or to the left hand?'--'To the right,' said
Caderousse. 'You cannot go wrong--the road is bordered by trees on both
sides.'--'Good--all right,' said a voice almost lost in the distance.
'Close the door,' said La Carconte; 'I do not like open doors when it
thunders.'--'Particularly when there is money in the house, eh?'
answered Caderousse, double-locking the door.


"He came into the room, went to the cupboard, took out the bag and
pocket-book, and both began, for the third time, to count their gold and
bank-notes. I never saw such an expression of cupidity as the flickering
lamp revealed in those two countenances. The woman, especially, was
hideous; her usual feverish tremulousness was intensified, her
countenance had become livid, and her eyes resembled burning coals.
'Why,' she inquired in a hoarse voice, 'did you invite him to sleep here
tonight?'--'Why?' said Caderousse with a shudder; 'why, that he might
not have the trouble of returning to Beaucaire.'--'Ah,' responded the
woman, with an expression impossible to describe; 'I thought it was for
something else.'--'Woman, woman--why do you have such ideas?' cried
Caderousse; 'or, if you have them, why don't you keep them to
yourself?'--'Well,' said La Carconte, after a moment's pause, 'you are
not a man.'--'What do you mean?' added Caderousse.--'If you had been a
man, you would not have let him go from here.'--'Woman!'--'Or else he
should not have reached Beaucaire.'--'Woman!'--'The road takes a turn--
he is obliged to follow it--while alongside of the canal there is a
shorter road.'--'Woman!--you offend the good God. There--listen!' And at
this moment there was a tremendous peal of thunder, while the livid
lightning illumined the room, and the thunder, rolling away in the
distance, seemed to withdraw unwillingly from the cursed abode. 'Mercy!'
said Caderousse, crossing himself.


"At the same moment, and in the midst of the terrifying silence which
usually follows a clap of thunder, they heard a knocking at the door.
Caderousse and his wife started and looked aghast at each other. 'Who's
there?' cried Caderousse, rising, and drawing up in a heap the gold and
notes scattered over the table, and which he covered with his two
hands.--'It is I,' shouted a voice.--'And who are you?'--'Eh, _pardieu!_
Joannes, the jeweller.'--'Well, and you said I offended the good God,'
said La Carconte with a horrid smile. 'Why, the good God sends him back
again.' Caderousse sank pale and breathless into his chair. La Carconte,
on the contrary, rose, and going with a firm step towards the door,
opened it, saying, as she did so--'Come in, dear M. Joannes.'--'_Ma
foi_,' said the jeweller, drenched with rain, 'I am not destined to
return to Beaucaire tonight. The shortest follies are best, my dear
Caderousse. You offered me hospitality, and I accept it, and have
returned to sleep beneath your friendly roof.' Caderousse stammered out
something, while he wiped away the sweat that started to his brow. La
Carconte double-locked the door behind the jeweller."



Chapter 45. The Rain of Blood

As the jeweller returned to the apartment, he cast around him a
scrutinizing glance--but there was nothing to excite suspicion, if it
did not exist, or to confirm it, if it were already awakened.
Caderousse's hands still grasped the gold and bank-notes, and La
Carconte called up her sweetest smiles while welcoming the reappearance
of their guest. 'Well, well,' said the jeweller, 'you seem, my good
friends, to have had some fears respecting the accuracy of your money,
by counting it over so carefully directly I was gone.'--'Oh, no,'
answered Caderousse, 'that was not my reason, I can assure you; but the
circumstances by which we have become possessed of this wealth are so
unexpected, as to make us scarcely credit our good fortune, and it is
only by placing the actual proof of our riches before our eyes that we
can persuade ourselves that the whole affair is not a dream.' The
jeweller smiled.--'Have you any other guests in your house?' inquired
he.--'Nobody but ourselves,' replied Caderousse; 'the fact is, we do not
lodge travellers--indeed, our tavern is so near the town, that nobody
would think of stopping here.'--'Then I am afraid I shall very much
inconvenience you.'--'Inconvenience us? Not at all, my dear sir,' said
La Carconte in her most gracious manner. 'Not at all, I assure you.'--
'But where will you manage to stow me?'--'In the chamber overhead.'--
'Surely that is where you yourselves sleep?'--'Never mind that; we have
a second bed in the adjoining room.' Caderousse stared at his wife with
much astonishment.

"The jeweller, meanwhile, was humming a song as he stood warming his
back at the fire La Carconte had kindled to dry the wet garments of her
guest; and this done, she next occupied herself in arranging his supper,
by spreading a napkin at the end of the table, and placing on it the
slender remains of their dinner, to which she added three or four fresh-
laid eggs. Caderousse had once more parted with his treasure--the
banknotes were replaced in the pocket-book, the gold put back into the
bag, and the whole carefully locked in the cupboard. He then began
pacing the room with a pensive and gloomy air, glancing from time to
time at the jeweller, who stood reeking with the steam from his wet
clothes, and merely changing his place on the warm hearth, to enable the
whole of his garments to be dried.

"'There,' said La Carconte, as she placed a bottle of wine on the table,
'supper is ready whenever you are.'--'And you?' asked Joannes.--'I don't
want any supper,' said Caderousse.--'We dined so very late,' hastily
interposed La Carconte.--'Then it seems I am to eat alone,' remarked the
jeweller.--'Oh, we shall have the pleasure of waiting upon you,'
answered La Carconte, with an eager attention she was not accustomed to
manifest even to guests who paid for what they took.

"From time to time Caderousse darted on his wife keen, searching
glances, but rapid as the lightning flash. The storm still continued.
'There, there,' said La Carconte; 'do you hear that? upon my word, you
did well to come back.'--'Nevertheless,' replied the jeweller, 'if by
the time I have finished my supper the tempest has at all abated, I
shall make another start.'--'It's the mistral,' said Caderousse, 'and it
will be sure to last till tomorrow morning.' He sighed heavily.--'Well,'
said the jeweller, as he placed himself at table, 'all I can say is, so
much the worse for those who are abroad.'--'Yes,' chimed in La Carconte,
'they will have a wretched night of it.'

"The jeweller began eating his supper, and the woman, who was ordinarily
so querulous and indifferent to all who approached her, was suddenly
transformed into the most smiling and attentive hostess. Had the unhappy
man on whom she lavished her assiduities been previously acquainted with
her, so sudden an alteration might well have excited suspicion in his
mind, or at least have greatly astonished him. Caderousse, meanwhile,
continued to pace the room in gloomy silence, sedulously avoiding the
sight of his guest; but as soon as the stranger had completed his
repast, the agitated innkeeper went eagerly to the door and opened it.
'I believe the storm is over,' said he. But as if to contradict his
statement, at that instant a violent clap of thunder seemed to shake the
house to its very foundation, while a sudden gust of wind, mingled with
rain, extinguished the lamp he held in his hand. Trembling and awe-
struck, Caderousse hastily shut the door and returned to his guest,
while La Carconte lighted a candle by the smouldering ashes that
glimmered on the hearth. 'You must be tired,' said she to the jeweller;
'I have spread a pair of white sheets on your bed; go up when you are
ready, and sleep well.'

"Joannes stayed for a while to see whether the storm seemed to abate in
its fury, but a brief space of time sufficed to assure him that, instead
of diminishing, the violence of the rain and thunder momentarily
increased; resigning himself, therefore, to what seemed inevitable, he
bade his host good-night, and mounted the stairs. He passed over my head
and I heard the flooring creak beneath his footsteps. The quick, eager
glance of La Carconte followed him as he ascended, while Caderousse, on
the contrary, turned his back, and seemed most anxiously to avoid even
glancing at him.

"All these circumstances did not strike me as painfully at the time as
they have since done; in fact, all that had happened (with the exception
of the story of the diamond, which certainly did wear an air of
improbability), appeared natural enough, and called for neither
apprehension nor mistrust; but, worn out as I was with fatigue, and
fully purposing to proceed onwards directly the tempest abated, I
determined to obtain a few hours' sleep. Overhead I could accurately
distinguish every movement of the jeweller, who, after making the best
arrangements in his power for passing a comfortable night, threw himself
on his bed, and I could hear it creak and groan beneath his weight.
Insensibly my eyelids grew heavy, deep sleep stole over me, and having
no suspicion of anything wrong, I sought not to shake it off. I looked
into the kitchen once more and saw Caderousse sitting by the side of a
long table upon one of the low wooden stools which in country places are
