"A louis on account for a fowl?"

"Certainly; and your excellency now owes me 4,999 louis." Danglars
opened his enormous eyes on hearing this gigantic joke. "Come, come,
this is very droll--very amusing--I allow; but, as I am very hungry,
pray allow me to eat. Stay, here is another louis for you."

"Then that will make only 4,998 louis more," said Peppino with the same
indifference. "I shall get them all in time."

"Oh, as for that," said Danglars, angry at this prolongation of the
jest,--"as for that you won't get them at all. Go to the devil! You do
not know with whom you have to deal!"

Peppino made a sign, and the youth hastily removed the fowl. Danglars
threw himself upon his goat-skin, and Peppino, reclosing the door, again
began eating his peas and bacon. Though Danglars could not see Peppino,
the noise of his teeth allowed no doubt as to his occupation. He was
certainly eating, and noisily too, like an ill-bred man. "Brute!" said
Danglars. Peppino pretended not to hear him, and without even turning
his head continued to eat slowly. Danglars' stomach felt so empty, that
it seemed as if it would be impossible ever to fill it again; still he
had patience for another half-hour, which appeared to him like a
century. He again arose and went to the door. "Come, sir, do not keep me
starving here any longer, but tell me what they want."

"Nay, your excellency, it is you who should tell us what you want. Give
your orders, and we will execute them."

"Then open the door directly." Peppino obeyed. "Now look here, I want
something to eat! To eat--do you hear?"

"Are you hungry?"

"Come, you understand me."

"What would your excellency like to eat?"

"A piece of dry bread, since the fowls are beyond all price in this
accursed place."

"Bread? Very well. Hallo, there, some bread!" he called. The youth
brought a small loaf. "How much?" asked Danglars.

"Four thousand nine hundred and ninety-eight louis," said Peppino; "You
have paid two louis in advance."


"What? One hundred thousand francs for a loaf?"

"One hundred thousand francs," repeated Peppino.

"But you only asked 100,000 francs for a fowl!"

"We have a fixed price for all our provisions. It signifies nothing
whether you eat much or little--whether you have ten dishes or one--it
is always the same price."

"What, still keeping up this silly jest? My dear fellow, it is perfectly
ridiculous--stupid! You had better tell me at once that you intend
starving me to death."

"Oh, dear, no, your excellency, unless you intend to commit suicide. Pay
and eat."

"And what am I to pay with, brute?" said Danglars, enraged. "Do you
suppose I carry 100,000 francs in my pocket?"

"Your excellency has 5,050,000 francs in your pocket; that will be fifty
fowls at 100,000 francs apiece, and half a fowl for the 50,000."

Danglars shuddered. The bandage fell from his eyes, and he understood
the joke, which he did not think quite so stupid as he had done just
before. "Come," he said, "if I pay you the 100,000 francs, will you be
satisfied, and allow me to eat at my ease?"

"Certainly," said Peppino.

"But how can I pay them?"

"Oh, nothing easier; you have an account open with Messrs. Thomson &
French, Via dei Banchi, Rome; give me a draft for 4,998 louis on these
gentlemen, and our banker shall take it." Danglars thought it as well to
comply with a good grace, so he took the pen, ink, and paper Peppino
offered him, wrote the draft, and signed it. "Here," he said, "here is a
draft at sight."

"And here is your fowl." Danglars sighed while he carved the fowl; it
appeared very thin for the price it had cost. As for Peppino, he
examined the paper attentively, put it into his pocket, and continued
eating his peas.



Chapter 116. The Pardon

The next day Danglars was again hungry; certainly the air of that
dungeon was very provocative of appetite. The prisoner expected that he
would be at no expense that day, for like an economical man he had
concealed half of his fowl and a piece of the bread in the corner of his
cell. But he had no sooner eaten than he felt thirsty; he had forgotten
that. He struggled against his thirst till his tongue clave to the roof
of his mouth; then, no longer able to resist, he called out. The
sentinel opened the door; it was a new face. He thought it would be
better to transact business with his old acquaintance, so he sent for
Peppino. "Here I am, your excellency," said Peppino, with an eagerness
which Danglars thought favorable to him. "What do you want?"

"Something to drink."

"Your excellency knows that wine is beyond all price near Rome."

"Then give me water," cried Danglars, endeavoring to parry the blow.

"Oh, water is even more scarce than wine, your excellency,--there has
been such a drought."

"Come," thought Danglars, "it is the same old story." And while he
smiled as he attempted to regard the affair as a joke, he felt his
temples get moist with perspiration.

"Come, my friend," said Danglars, seeing that he made no impression on
Peppino, "you will not refuse me a glass of wine?"

"I have already told you that we do not sell at retail."

"Well, then, let me have a bottle of the least expensive."

"They are all the same price."

"And what is that?"

"Twenty-five thousand francs a bottle."

"Tell me," cried Danglars, in a tone whose bitterness Harpagon [*] alone
has been capable of revealing--"tell me that you wish to despoil me of
all; it will be sooner over than devouring me piecemeal."


* The miser in Molière's comedy of _L'Avare_.--Ed.

"It is possible such may be the master's intention."

"The master?--who is he?"

"The person to whom you were conducted yesterday."

"Where is he?"

"Here."

"Let me see him."

"Certainly." And the next moment Luigi Vampa appeared before Danglars.

"You sent for me?" he said to the prisoner.

"Are you, sir, the chief of the people who brought me here?"

"Yes, your excellency. What then?"

"How much do you require for my ransom?"

"Merely the 5,000,000 you have about you." Danglars felt a dreadful
spasm dart through his heart. "But this is all I have left in the
world," he said, "out of an immense fortune. If you deprive me of that,
take away my life also."

"We are forbidden to shed your blood."

"And by whom are you forbidden?"

"By him we obey."

"You do, then, obey someone?"

"Yes, a chief."

"I thought you said you were the chief?"

"So I am of these men; but there is another over me."

"And did your superior order you to treat me in this way?"

"Yes."

"But my purse will be exhausted."

"Probably."

"Come," said Danglars, "will you take a million?"

"No."

"Two millions?--three?--four? Come, four? I will give them to you on
condition that you let me go."

"Why do you offer me 4,000,000 for what is worth 5,000,000? This is a
kind of usury, banker, that I do not understand."

