"So distinguished an individual as yourself," cried Albert, "could
scarcely have required an introduction."

"You are most kind; but as regards myself, I can find no merit I
possess, save that, as a millionaire, I might have become a partner in
the speculations of M. Aguado and M. Rothschild; but as my motive in
travelling to your capital would not have been for the pleasure of
dabbling in stocks, I stayed away till some favorable chance should
present itself of carrying my wish into execution. Your offer, however,
smooths all difficulties, and I have only to ask you, my dear M. de
Morcerf" (these words were accompanied by a most peculiar smile),
"whether you undertake, upon my arrival in France, to open to me the
doors of that fashionable world of which I know no more than a Huron or
a native of Cochin-China?"

"Oh, that I do, and with infinite pleasure," answered Albert; "and so
much the more readily as a letter received this morning from my father
summons me to Paris, in consequence of a treaty of marriage (my dear
Franz, do not smile, I beg of you) with a family of high standing, and
connected with the very cream of Parisian society."

"Connected by marriage, you mean," said Franz, laughingly.

"Well, never mind how it is," answered Albert, "it comes to the same
thing in the end. Perhaps by the time you return to Paris, I shall be
quite a sober, staid father of a family! A most edifying representative
I shall make of all the domestic virtues--don't you think so? But as
regards your wish to visit our fine city, my dear count, I can only say
that you may command me and mine to any extent you please."

"Then it is settled," said the count, "and I give you my solemn
assurance that I only waited an opportunity like the present to realize
plans that I have long meditated." Franz did not doubt that these plans
were the same concerning which the count had dropped a few words in the
grotto of Monte Cristo, and while the Count was speaking the young man
watched him closely, hoping to read something of his purpose in his
face, but his countenance was inscrutable especially when, as in the
present case, it was veiled in a sphinx-like smile. "But tell me now,
count," exclaimed Albert, delighted at the idea of having to chaperon so
distinguished a person as Monte Cristo; "tell me truly whether you are
in earnest, or if this project of visiting Paris is merely one of the
chimerical and uncertain air castles of which we make so many in the
course of our lives, but which, like a house built on the sand, is
liable to be blown over by the first puff of wind?"

"I pledge you my honor," returned the count, "that I mean to do as I
have said; both inclination and positive necessity compel me to visit
Paris."

"When do you propose going thither?"

"Have you made up your mind when you shall be there yourself?"

"Certainly I have; in a fortnight or three weeks' time, that is to say,
as fast as I can get there!"

"Nay," said the Count; "I will give you three months ere I join you; you
see I make an ample allowance for all delays and difficulties.

"And in three months' time," said Albert, "you will be at my house?"

"Shall we make a positive appointment for a particular day and hour?"
inquired the count; "only let me warn you that I am proverbial for my
punctilious exactitude in keeping my engagements."

"Day for day, hour for hour," said Albert; "that will suit me to a dot."

"So be it, then," replied the count, and extending his hand towards a
calendar, suspended near the chimney-piece, he said, "today is the 21st
of February;" and drawing out his watch, added, "it is exactly half-past
ten o'clock. Now promise me to remember this, and expect me the 21st of
May at the same hour in the forenoon."

"Capital," exclaimed Albert; "your breakfast shall be waiting."

"Where do you live?"

"No. 27, Rue du Helder."

"Have you bachelor's apartments there? I hope my coming will not put you
to any inconvenience."

"I reside in my father's house, but occupy a pavilion at the farther
side of the courtyard, entirely separated from the main building."

"Quite sufficient," replied the count, as, taking out his tablets, he
wrote down "No. 27, Rue du Helder, 21st May, half-past ten in the
morning."

"Now then," said the count, returning his tablets to his pocket, "make
yourself perfectly easy; the hand of your time-piece will not be more
accurate in marking the time than myself."

"Shall I see you again ere my departure?" asked Albert.

"That depends; when do you leave?"

"Tomorrow evening, at five o'clock."

"In that case I must say adieu to you, as I am compelled to go to
Naples, and shall not return hither before Saturday evening or Sunday
morning. And you, baron," pursued the count, addressing Franz, "do you
also depart tomorrow?"

"Yes."

"For France?"

"No, for Venice; I shall remain in Italy for another year or two."

"Then we shall not meet in Paris?"

"I fear I shall not have that honor."

"Well, since we must part," said the count, holding out a hand to each
of the young men, "allow me to wish you both a safe and pleasant
journey." It was the first time the hand of Franz had come in contact
with that of the mysterious individual before him, and unconsciously he
shuddered at its touch, for it felt cold and icy as that of a corpse.
"Let us understand each other," said Albert; "it is agreed--is it not?--
that you are to be at No. 27, in the Rue du Helder, on the 21st of May,
at half-past ten in the morning, and your word of honor passed for your
punctuality?"


"The 21st of May, at half-past ten in the morning, Rue du Helder, No.
27," replied the Count. The young men then rose, and bowing to the
count, quitted the room. "What is the matter?" asked Albert of Franz,
when they had returned to their own apartments; "you seem more than
commonly thoughtful."

"I will confess to you, Albert," replied Franz, "the count is a very
singular person, and the appointment you have made to meet him in Paris
fills me with a thousand apprehensions."

"My dear fellow," exclaimed Albert, "what can there possibly be in that
to excite uneasiness? Why, you must have lost your senses."

"Whether I am in my senses or not," answered Franz, "that is the way I
feel."

"Listen to me, Franz," said Albert; "I am glad that the occasion has
presented itself for saying this to you, for I have noticed how cold you
are in your bearing towards the count, while he, on the other hand, has
always been courtesy itself to us. Have you anything particular against
him?"

"Possibly."

"Did you ever meet him previously to coming hither?"

"I have."

"And where?"

"Will you promise me not to repeat a single word of what I am about to
tell you?"

"I promise."

"Upon your honor?"

"Upon my honor."

"Then listen to me." Franz then related to his friend the history of his
excursion to the Island of Monte Cristo and of his finding a party of
smugglers there, and the two Corsican bandits with them. He dwelt with
considerable force and energy on the almost magical hospitality he had
received from the count, and the magnificence of his entertainment in
the grotto of the _Thousand and One Nights_. He recounted, with
circumstantial exactitude, all the particulars of the supper, the
hashish, the statues, the dream, and how, at his awakening, there
remained no proof or trace of all these events, save the small yacht,
seen in the distant horizon driving under full sail toward Porto-
Vecchio. Then he detailed the conversation overheard by him at the
Colosseum, between the count and Vampa, in which the count had promised
to obtain the release of the bandit Peppino,--an engagement which, as
our readers are aware, he most faithfully fulfilled. At last he arrived
at the adventure of the preceding night, and the embarrassment in which
he found himself placed by not having sufficient cash by six or seven
hundred piastres to make up the sum required, and finally of his
application to the count and the picturesque and satisfactory result
that followed. Albert listened with the most profound attention. "Well,"
said he, when Franz had concluded, "what do you find to object to in all
you have related? The count is fond of travelling, and, being rich,
possesses a vessel of his own. Go but to Portsmouth or Southampton, and
you will find the harbors crowded with the yachts belonging to such of
the English as can afford the expense, and have the same liking for this
amusement. Now, by way of having a resting-place during his excursions,
avoiding the wretched cookery--which has been trying its best to poison
me during the last four months, while you have manfully resisted its
effects for as many years,--and obtaining a bed on which it is possible
to slumber, Monte Cristo has furnished for himself a temporary abode
where you first found him; but, to prevent the possibility of the Tuscan
government taking a fancy to his enchanted palace, and thereby depriving
him of the advantages naturally expected from so large an outlay of
capital, he has wisely enough purchased the island, and taken its name.
Just ask yourself, my good fellow, whether there are not many persons of
our acquaintance who assume the names of lands and properties they never
in their lives were masters of?"
