
"It seems to me," said Emmanuel, "that I see two young men down there,
who are evidently, waiting." Monte Cristo drew Morrel a step or two
behind his brother-in-law. "Maximilian," said he, "are your affections
disengaged?" Morrel looked at Monte Cristo with astonishment. "I do not
seek your confidence, my dear friend. I only ask you a simple question;
answer it;--that is all I require."

"I love a young girl, count."

"Do you love her much?"

"More than my life."

"Another hope defeated!" said the count. Then, with a sigh, "Poor
Haydée!" murmured he.

"To tell the truth, count, if I knew less of you, I should think that
you were less brave than you are."

"Because I sigh when thinking of someone I am leaving? Come, Morrel, it
is not like a soldier to be so bad a judge of courage. Do I regret life?
What is it to me, who have passed twenty years between life and death?
Moreover, do not alarm yourself, Morrel; this weakness, if it is such,
is betrayed to you alone. I know the world is a drawing-room, from which
we must retire politely and honestly; that is, with a bow, and our debts
of honor paid."

"That is to the purpose. Have you brought your arms?"

"I?--what for? I hope these gentlemen have theirs."

"I will inquire," said Morrel.

"Do; but make no treaty--you understand me?"

"You need not fear." Morrel advanced towards Beauchamp and Château-
Renaud, who, seeing his intention, came to meet him. The three young men
bowed to each other courteously, if not affably.

"Excuse me, gentlemen," said Morrel, "but I do not see M. de Morcerf."

"He sent us word this morning," replied Château-Renaud, "that he would
meet us on the ground."

"Ah," said Morrel. Beauchamp pulled out his watch. "It is only five
minutes past eight," said he to Morrel; "there is not much time lost
yet."

"Oh, I made no allusion of that kind," replied Morrel.

"There is a carriage coming," said Château-Renaud. It advanced rapidly
along one of the avenues leading towards the open space where they were
assembled. "You are doubtless provided with pistols, gentlemen? M. de
Monte Cristo yields his right of using his."

"We had anticipated this kindness on the part of the count," said
Beauchamp, "and I have brought some weapons which I bought eight or ten
days since, thinking to want them on a similar occasion. They are quite
new, and have not yet been used. Will you examine them."

"Oh, M. Beauchamp, if you assure me that M. de Morcerf does not know
these pistols, you may readily believe that your word will be quite
sufficient."

"Gentlemen," said Château-Renaud, "it is not Morcerf coming in that
carriage;--faith, it is Franz and Debray!" The two young men he
announced were indeed approaching. "What chance brings you here,
gentlemen?" said Château-Renaud, shaking hands with each of them.
"Because," said Debray, "Albert sent this morning to request us to
come." Beauchamp and Château-Renaud exchanged looks of astonishment. "I
think I understand his reason," said Morrel.

"What is it?"

"Yesterday afternoon I received a letter from M. de Morcerf, begging me
to attend the Opera."

"And I," said Debray.

"And I also," said Franz.

"And we, too," added Beauchamp and Château-Renaud.

"Having wished you all to witness the challenge, he now wishes you to be
present at the combat."

"Exactly so," said the young men; "you have probably guessed right."

"But, after all these arrangements, he does not come himself," said
Château-Renaud. "Albert is ten minutes after time."

"There he comes," said Beauchamp, "on horseback, at full gallop,
followed by a servant."

"How imprudent," said Château-Renaud, "to come on horseback to fight a
duel with pistols, after all the instructions I had given him."

"And besides," said Beauchamp, "with a collar above his cravat, an open
coat and white waistcoat! Why has he not painted a spot upon his heart?-
-it would have been more simple." Meanwhile Albert had arrived within
ten paces of the group formed by the five young men. He jumped from his
horse, threw the bridle on his servant's arms, and joined them. He was
pale, and his eyes were red and swollen; it was evident that he had not
slept. A shade of melancholy gravity overspread his countenance, which
was not natural to him. "I thank you, gentlemen," said he, "for having
complied with my request; I feel extremely grateful for this mark of
friendship." Morrel had stepped back as Morcerf approached, and remained
at a short distance. "And to you also, M. Morrel, my thanks are due.
Come, there cannot be too many."


"Sir," said Maximilian, "you are not perhaps aware that I am M. de Monte
Cristo's friend?"

"I was not sure, but I thought it might be so. So much the better; the
more honorable men there are here the better I shall be satisfied."

"M. Morrel," said Château-Renaud, "will you apprise the Count of Monte
Cristo that M. de Morcerf is arrived, and we are at his disposal?"
Morrel was preparing to fulfil his commission. Beauchamp had meanwhile
drawn the box of pistols from the carriage. "Stop, gentlemen," said
Albert; "I have two words to say to the Count of Monte Cristo."

"In private?" asked Morrel.

"No, sir; before all who are here."

Albert's witnesses looked at each other. Franz and Debray exchanged some
words in a whisper, and Morrel, rejoiced at this unexpected incident,
went to fetch the count, who was walking in a retired path with
Emmanuel. "What does he want with me?" said Monte Cristo.

"I do not know, but he wishes to speak to you."

"Ah?" said Monte Cristo, "I trust he is not going to tempt me by some
fresh insult!"

"I do not think that such is his intention," said Morrel.

The count advanced, accompanied by Maximilian and Emmanuel. His calm and
serene look formed a singular contrast to Albert's grief-stricken face,
who approached also, followed by the other four young men. When at three
paces distant from each other, Albert and the count stopped.

"Approach, gentlemen," said Albert; "I wish you not to lose one word of
what I am about to have the honor of saying to the Count of Monte
Cristo, for it must be repeated by you to all who will listen to it,
strange as it may appear to you."

"Proceed, sir," said the count.

"Sir," said Albert, at first with a tremulous voice, but which gradually
became firmer, "I reproached you with exposing the conduct of M. de
Morcerf in Epirus, for guilty as I knew he was, I thought you had no
right to punish him; but I have since learned that you had that right.
It is not Fernand Mondego's treachery towards Ali Pasha which induces me
so readily to excuse you, but the treachery of the fisherman Fernand
towards you, and the almost unheard-of miseries which were its
consequences; and I say, and proclaim it publicly, that you were
justified in revenging yourself on my father, and I, his son, thank you
for not using greater severity."

Had a thunderbolt fallen in the midst of the spectators of this
unexpected scene, it would not have surprised them more than did
Albert's declaration. As for Monte Cristo, his eyes slowly rose towards
heaven with an expression of infinite gratitude. He could not understand
how Albert's fiery nature, of which he had seen so much among the Roman
bandits, had suddenly stooped to this humiliation. He recognized the
influence of Mercédès, and saw why her noble heart had not opposed the
sacrifice she knew beforehand would be useless. "Now, sir," said Albert,
"if you think my apology sufficient, pray give me your hand. Next to the
merit of infallibility which you appear to possess, I rank that of
candidly acknowledging a fault. But this confession concerns me only. I
acted well as a man, but you have acted better than man. An angel alone
could have saved one of us from death--that angel came from heaven, if
not to make us friends (which, alas, fatality renders impossible), at
least to make us esteem each other."

Monte Cristo, with moistened eye, heaving breast, and lips half open,
extended to Albert a hand which the latter pressed with a sentiment
resembling respectful fear. "Gentlemen," said he, "M. de Monte Cristo
receives my apology. I had acted hastily towards him. Hasty actions are
generally bad ones. Now my fault is repaired. I hope the world will not
call me cowardly for acting as my conscience dictated. But if anyone
should entertain a false opinion of me," added he, drawing himself up as
if he would challenge both friends and enemies, "I shall endeavor to
correct his mistake."

"What happened during the night?" asked Beauchamp of Château-Renaud; "we
appear to make a very sorry figure here."

"In truth, what Albert has just done is either very despicable or very
noble," replied the baron.

"What can it mean?" said Debray to Franz. "The Count of Monte Cristo
acts dishonorably to M. de Morcerf, and is justified by his son! Had I
ten Yaninas in my family, I should only consider myself the more bound
to fight ten times." As for Monte Cristo, his head was bent down, his
arms were powerless. Bowing under the weight of twenty-four years'
