
"No, Mercédès," said Monte Cristo, "no; you judge yourself with too much
severity. You are a noble-minded woman, and it was your grief that
disarmed me. Still I was but an agent, led on by an invisible and
offended Deity, who chose not to withhold the fatal blow that I was
destined to hurl. I take that God to witness, at whose feet I have
prostrated myself daily for the last ten years, that I would have
sacrificed my life to you, and with my life the projects that were
indissolubly linked with it. But--and I say it with some pride,
Mercédès--God needed me, and I lived. Examine the past and the present,
and endeavor to dive into futurity, and then say whether I am not a
divine instrument. The most dreadful misfortunes, the most frightful
sufferings, the abandonment of all those who loved me, the persecution
of those who did not know me, formed the trials of my youth; when
suddenly, from captivity, solitude, misery, I was restored to light and
liberty, and became the possessor of a fortune so brilliant, so
unbounded, so unheard-of, that I must have been blind not to be
conscious that God had endowed me with it to work out his own great
designs. From that time I looked upon this fortune as something confided
to me for a particular purpose. Not a thought was given to a life which
you once, Mercédès, had the power to render blissful; not one hour of
peaceful calm was mine; but I felt myself driven on like an
exterminating angel. Like adventurous captains about to embark on some
enterprise full of danger, I laid in my provisions, I loaded my weapons,
I collected every means of attack and defence; I inured my body to the
most violent exercises, my soul to the bitterest trials; I taught my arm
to slay, my eyes to behold excruciating sufferings, and my mouth to
smile at the most horrid spectacles. Good-natured, confiding, and
forgiving as I had been, I became revengeful, cunning, and wicked, or
rather, immovable as fate. Then I launched out into the path that was
opened to me. I overcame every obstacle, and reached the goal; but woe
to those who stood in my pathway!"


"Enough," said Mercédès; "enough, Edmond! Believe me, that she who alone
recognized you has been the only one to comprehend you; and had she
crossed your path, and you had crushed her like glass, still, Edmond,
still she must have admired you! Like the gulf between me and the past,
there is an abyss between you, Edmond, and the rest of mankind; and I
tell you freely that the comparison I draw between you and other men
will ever be one of my greatest tortures. No, there is nothing in the
world to resemble you in worth and goodness! But we must say farewell,
Edmond, and let us part."

"Before I leave you, Mercédès, have you no request to make?" said the
count.

"I desire but one thing in this world, Edmond,--the happiness of my
son."

"Pray to the Almighty to spare his life, and I will take upon myself to
promote his happiness."

"Thank you, Edmond."

"But have you no request to make for yourself, Mercédès?"

"For myself I want nothing. I live, as it were, between two graves. One
is that of Edmond Dantès, lost to me long, long since. He had my love!
That word ill becomes my faded lip now, but it is a memory dear to my
heart, and one that I would not lose for all that the world contains.
The other grave is that of the man who met his death from the hand of
Edmond Dantès. I approve of the deed, but I must pray for the dead."

"Your son shall be happy, Mercédès," repeated the count.

"Then I shall enjoy as much happiness as this world can possibly
confer."

"But what are your intentions?"

"To say that I shall live here, like the Mercédès of other times,
gaining my bread by labor, would not be true, nor would you believe me.
I have no longer the strength to do anything but to spend my days in
prayer. However, I shall have no occasion to work, for the little sum of
money buried by you, and which I found in the place you mentioned, will
be sufficient to maintain me. Rumor will probably be busy respecting me,
my occupations, my manner of living--that will signify but little."

"Mercédès," said the count, "I do not say it to blame you, but you made
an unnecessary sacrifice in relinquishing the whole of the fortune
amassed by M. de Morcerf; half of it at least by right belonged to you,
in virtue of your vigilance and economy."

"I perceive what you are intending to propose to me; but I cannot accept
it, Edmond--my son would not permit it."

"Nothing shall be done without the full approbation of Albert de
Morcerf. I will make myself acquainted with his intentions and will
submit to them. But if he be willing to accept my offers, will you
oppose them?"

"You well know, Edmond, that I am no longer a reasoning creature; I have
no will, unless it be the will never to decide. I have been so
overwhelmed by the many storms that have broken over my head, that I am
become passive in the hands of the Almighty, like a sparrow in the
talons of an eagle. I live, because it is not ordained for me to die. If
succor be sent to me, I will accept it."

"Ah, madame," said Monte Cristo, "you should not talk thus! It is not so
we should evince our resignation to the will of heaven; on the contrary,
we are all free agents."

"Alas!" exclaimed Mercédès, "if it were so, if I possessed free-will,
but without the power to render that will efficacious, it would drive me
to despair."

Monte Cristo dropped his head and shrank from the vehemence of her
grief.

"Will you not even say you will see me again?" he asked.

"On the contrary, we shall meet again," said Mercédès, pointing to
heaven with solemnity. "I tell you so to prove to you that I still
hope."

And after pressing her own trembling hand upon that of the count,
Mercédès rushed up the stairs and disappeared. Monte Cristo slowly left
the house and turned towards the quay. But Mercédès did not witness his
departure, although she was seated at the little window of the room
which had been occupied by old Dantès. Her eyes were straining to see
the ship which was carrying her son over the vast sea; but still her
voice involuntarily murmured softly,

"Edmond, Edmond, Edmond!"



Chapter 113. The Past

The count departed with a sad heart from the house in which he had left
Mercédès, probably never to behold her again. Since the death of little
Edward a great change had taken place in Monte Cristo. Having reached
the summit of his vengeance by a long and tortuous path, he saw an abyss
of doubt yawning before him. More than this, the conversation which had
just taken place between Mercédès and himself had awakened so many
recollections in his heart that he felt it necessary to combat with
them. A man of the count's temperament could not long indulge in that
melancholy which can exist in common minds, but which destroys superior
ones. He thought he must have made an error in his calculations if he
now found cause to blame himself.

"I cannot have deceived myself," he said; "I must look upon the past in
a false light. What!" he continued, "can I have been following a false
path?--can the end which I proposed be a mistaken end?--can one hour
have sufficed to prove to an architect that the work upon which he
founded all his hopes was an impossible, if not a sacrilegious,
undertaking? I cannot reconcile myself to this idea--it would madden me.
The reason why I am now dissatisfied is that I have not a clear
appreciation of the past. The past, like the country through which we
walk, becomes indistinct as we advance. My position is like that of a
person wounded in a dream; he feels the wound, though he cannot
recollect when he received it.

"Come, then, thou regenerate man, thou extravagant prodigal, thou
awakened sleeper, thou all-powerful visionary, thou invincible
millionaire,--once again review thy past life of starvation and
wretchedness, revisit the scenes where fate and misfortune conducted,
and where despair received thee. Too many diamonds, too much gold and
splendor, are now reflected by the mirror in which Monte Cristo seeks to
behold Dantès. Hide thy diamonds, bury thy gold, shroud thy splendor,
exchange riches for poverty, liberty for a prison, a living body for a
corpse!"

As he thus reasoned, Monte Cristo walked down the Rue de la Caisserie.
It was the same through which, twenty-four years ago, he had been
conducted by a silent and nocturnal guard; the houses, today so smiling
and animated, were on that night dark, mute, and closed. "And yet they
were the same," murmured Monte Cristo, "only now it is broad daylight
instead of night; it is the sun which brightens the place, and makes it
appear so cheerful."

He proceeded towards the quay by the Rue Saint-Laurent, and advanced to
the Consigne; it was the point where he had embarked. A pleasure-boat
with striped awning was going by. Monte Cristo called the owner, who
immediately rowed up to him with the eagerness of a boatman hoping for a
good fare. The weather was magnificent, and the excursion a treat.

The sun, red and flaming, was sinking into the embrace of the welcoming
ocean. The sea, smooth as crystal, was now and then disturbed by the
leaping of fish, which were pursued by some unseen enemy and sought for
safety in another element; while on the extreme verge of the horizon
might be seen the fishermen's boats, white and graceful as the sea-gull,
or the merchant vessels bound for Corsica or Spain.

But notwithstanding the serene sky, the gracefully formed boats, and the
golden light in which the whole scene was bathed, the Count of Monte
Cristo, wrapped in his cloak, could think only of this terrible voyage,
the details of which were one by one recalled to his memory. The
solitary light burning at the Catalans; that first sight of the Château
d'If, which told him whither they were leading him; the struggle with
the gendarmes when he wished to throw himself overboard; his despair
when he found himself vanquished, and the sensation when the muzzle of
the carbine touched his forehead--all these were brought before him in
vivid and frightful reality.

Like the streams which the heat of the summer has dried up, and which
after the autumnal storms gradually begin oozing drop by drop, so did
the count feel his heart gradually fill with the bitterness which
formerly nearly overwhelmed Edmond Dantès. Clear sky, swift-flitting
