energy,--Marseilles, the younger sister of Tyre and Carthage, the
successor to them in the empire of the Mediterranean,--Marseilles, old,
yet always young. Powerful memories were stirred within them by the
sight of the round tower, Fort Saint-Nicolas, the City Hall designed by
Puget, [*] the port with its brick quays, where they had both played in
childhood, and it was with one accord that they stopped on the
Canebière.


* Pierre Puget, the sculptor-architect, was born at Marseilles in 1622.

A vessel was setting sail for Algiers, on board of which the bustle
usually attending departure prevailed. The passengers and their
relations crowded on the deck, friends taking a tender but sorrowful
leave of each other, some weeping, others noisy in their grief, the
whole forming a spectacle that might be exciting even to those who
witnessed similar sights daily, but which had no power to disturb the
current of thought that had taken possession of the mind of Maximilian
from the moment he had set foot on the broad pavement of the quay.

"Here," said he, leaning heavily on the arm of Monte Cristo,--"here is
the spot where my father stopped, when the _Pharaon_ entered the port;
it was here that the good old man, whom you saved from death and
dishonor, threw himself into my arms. I yet feel his warm tears on my
face, and his were not the only tears shed, for many who witnessed our
meeting wept also."

Monte Cristo gently smiled and said,--"I was there;" at the same time
pointing to the corner of a street. As he spoke, and in the very
direction he indicated, a groan, expressive of bitter grief, was heard,
and a woman was seen waving her hand to a passenger on board the vessel
about to sail. Monte Cristo looked at her with an emotion that must have
been remarked by Morrel had not his eyes been fixed on the vessel.

"Oh, heavens!" exclaimed Morrel, "I do not deceive myself--that young
man who is waving his hat, that youth in the uniform of a lieutenant, is
Albert de Morcerf!"


"Yes," said Monte Cristo, "I recognized him."

"How so?--you were looking the other way."

The Count smiled, as he was in the habit of doing when he did not want
to make any reply, and he again turned towards the veiled woman, who
soon disappeared at the corner of the street. Turning to his friend,--
"Dear Maximilian," said the count, "have you nothing to do in this
land?"

"I have to weep over the grave of my father," replied Morrel in a broken
voice.

"Well, then, go,--wait for me there, and I will soon join you."

"You leave me, then?"

"Yes; I also have a pious visit to pay."

Morrel allowed his hand to fall into that which the count extended to
him; then with an inexpressibly sorrowful inclination of the head he
quitted the count and bent his steps to the east of the city. Monte
Cristo remained on the same spot until Maximilian was out of sight; he
then walked slowly towards the Allées de Meillan to seek out a small
house with which our readers were made familiar at the beginning of this
story.

It yet stood, under the shade of the fine avenue of lime-trees, which
forms one of the most frequent walks of the idlers of Marseilles,
covered by an immense vine, which spreads its aged and blackened
branches over the stone front, burnt yellow by the ardent sun of the
south. Two stone steps worn away by the friction of many feet led to the
door, which was made of three planks; the door had never been painted or
varnished, so great cracks yawned in it during the dry season to close
again when the rains came on. The house, with all its crumbling
antiquity and apparent misery, was yet cheerful and picturesque, and was
the same that old Dantès formerly inhabited--the only difference being
that the old man occupied merely the garret, while the whole house was
now placed at the command of Mercédès by the count.

The woman whom the count had seen leave the ship with so much regret
entered this house; she had scarcely closed the door after her when
Monte Cristo appeared at the corner of a street, so that he found and
lost her again almost at the same instant. The worn out steps were old
acquaintances of his; he knew better than anyone else how to open that
weather-beaten door with the large headed nail which served to raise the
latch within. He entered without knocking, or giving any other
intimation of his presence, as if he had been a friend or the master of
the place. At the end of a passage paved with bricks, was a little
garden, bathed in sunshine, and rich in warmth and light. In this garden
Mercédès had found, at the place indicated by the count, the sum of
money which he, through a sense of delicacy, had described as having
been placed there twenty-four years previously. The trees of the garden
were easily seen from the steps of the street-door.

Monte Cristo, on stepping into the house, heard a sigh that was almost a
deep sob; he looked in the direction whence it came, and there under an
arbor of Virginia jessamine, [*] with its thick foliage and beautiful
long purple flowers, he saw Mercédès seated, with her head bowed, and
weeping bitterly. She had raised her veil, and with her face hidden by
her hands was giving free scope to the sighs and tears which had been so
long restrained by the presence of her son.


* The Carolina--not Virginia--jessamine, _gelsemium sempervirens_
(properly speaking not a jessamine at all) has yellow blossoms. The
reference is no doubt to the _Wistaria frutescens_.--Ed.

Monte Cristo advanced a few steps, which were heard on the gravel.
Mercédès raised her head, and uttered a cry of terror on beholding a man
before her.


"Madame," said the count, "it is no longer in my power to restore you to
happiness, but I offer you consolation; will you deign to accept it as
coming from a friend?"

"I am, indeed, most wretched," replied Mercédès. "Alone in the world, I
had but my son, and he has left me!"

"He possesses a noble heart, madame," replied the count, "and he has
acted rightly. He feels that every man owes a tribute to his country;
some contribute their talents, others their industry; these devote their
blood, those their nightly labors, to the same cause. Had he remained
with you, his life must have become a hateful burden, nor would he have
participated in your griefs. He will increase in strength and honor by
struggling with adversity, which he will convert into prosperity. Leave
him to build up the future for you, and I venture to say you will
confide it to safe hands."

"Oh," replied the wretched woman, mournfully shaking her head, "the
prosperity of which you speak, and which, from the bottom of my heart, I
pray God in his mercy to grant him, I can never enjoy. The bitter cup of
adversity has been drained by me to the very dregs, and I feel that the
grave is not far distant. You have acted kindly, count, in bringing me
back to the place where I have enjoyed so much bliss. I ought to meet
death on the same spot where happiness was once all my own."

"Alas," said Monte Cristo, "your words sear and embitter my heart, the
more so as you have every reason to hate me. I have been the cause of
all your misfortunes; but why do you pity, instead of blaming me? You
render me still more unhappy----"

"Hate you, blame you--_you_, Edmond! Hate, reproach, the man that has
spared my son's life! For was it not your fatal and sanguinary intention
to destroy that son of whom M. de Morcerf was so proud? Oh, look at me
closely, and discover if you can even the semblance of a reproach in
me."

The count looked up and fixed his eyes on Mercédès, who arose partly
from her seat and extended both her hands towards him.

"Oh, look at me," continued she, with a feeling of profound melancholy,
"my eyes no longer dazzle by their brilliancy, for the time has long
fled since I used to smile on Edmond Dantès, who anxiously looked out
for me from the window of yonder garret, then inhabited by his old
father. Years of grief have created an abyss between those days and the
present. I neither reproach you nor hate you, my friend. Oh, no, Edmond,
it is myself that I blame, myself that I hate! Oh, miserable creature
that I am!" cried she, clasping her hands, and raising her eyes to
heaven. "I once possessed piety, innocence, and love, the three
ingredients of the happiness of angels, and now what am I?"

Monte Cristo approached her, and silently took her hand.

"No," said she, withdrawing it gently--"no, my friend, touch me not. You
have spared me, yet of all those who have fallen under your vengeance I
was the most guilty. They were influenced by hatred, by avarice, and by
self-love; but I was base, and for want of courage acted against my
judgment. Nay, do not press my hand, Edmond; you are thinking, I am
sure, of some kind speech to console me, but do not utter it to me,
reserve it for others more worthy of your kindness. See" (and she
exposed her face completely to view)--"see, misfortune has silvered my
hair, my eyes have shed so many tears that they are encircled by a rim
of purple, and my brow is wrinkled. You, Edmond, on the contrary,--you
are still young, handsome, dignified; it is because you have had faith;
because you have had strength, because you have had trust in God, and
God has sustained you. But as for me, I have been a coward; I have
denied God and he has abandoned me."


Mercédès burst into tears; her woman's heart was breaking under its load
of memories. Monte Cristo took her hand and imprinted a kiss on it; but
she herself felt that it was a kiss of no greater warmth than he would
have bestowed on the hand of some marble statue of a saint.

"It often happens," continued she, "that a first fault destroys the
prospects of a whole life. I believed you dead; why did I survive you?
What good has it done me to mourn for you eternally in the secret
recesses of my heart?--only to make a woman of thirty-nine look like a
woman of fifty. Why, having recognized you, and I the only one to do so-
-why was I able to save my son alone? Ought I not also to have rescued
the man that I had accepted for a husband, guilty though he were? Yet I
let him die! What do I say? Oh, merciful heavens, was I not accessory to
his death by my supine insensibility, by my contempt for him, not
remembering, or not willing to remember, that it was for my sake he had
become a traitor and a perjurer? In what am I benefited by accompanying
my son so far, since I now abandon him, and allow him to depart alone to
the baneful climate of Africa? Oh, I have been base, cowardly, I tell
you; I have abjured my affections, and like all renegades I am of evil
omen to those who surround me!"
