
"Is your steward also a Nubian?" asked Debray.

"No, he is a countryman of yours, if a Corsican is a countryman of any
one's. But you know him, M. de Morcerf."

"Is it that excellent M. Bertuccio, who understands hiring windows so
well?"

"Yes, you saw him the day I had the honor of receiving you; he has been
a soldier, a smuggler--in fact, everything. I would not be quite sure
that he has not been mixed up with the police for some trifle--a stab
with a knife, for instance."

"And you have chosen this honest citizen for your steward," said Debray.
"Of how much does he rob you every year?"

"On my word," replied the count, "not more than another. I am sure he
answers my purpose, knows no impossibility, and so I keep him."

"Then," continued Château-Renaud, "since you have an establishment, a
steward, and a hotel in the Champs-Élysées, you only want a mistress."
Albert smiled. He thought of the fair Greek he had seen in the count's
box at the Argentina and Valle theatres. "I have something better than
that," said Monte Cristo; "I have a slave. You procure your mistresses
from the opera, the Vaudeville, or the Variétés; I purchased mine at
Constantinople; it cost me more, but I have nothing to fear."

"But you forget," replied Debray, laughing, "that we are Franks by name
and franks by nature, as King Charles said, and that the moment she puts
her foot in France your slave becomes free."

"Who will tell her?"

"The first person who sees her."

"She only speaks Romaic."

"That is different."

"But at least we shall see her," said Beauchamp, "or do you keep eunuchs
as well as mutes?"

"Oh, no," replied Monte Cristo; "I do not carry brutalism so far.
Everyone who surrounds me is free to quit me, and when they leave me
will no longer have any need of me or anyone else; it is for that
reason, perhaps, that they do not quit me." They had long since passed
to dessert and cigars.

"My dear Albert," said Debray, rising, "it is half-past two. Your guest
is charming, but you leave the best company to go into the worst
sometimes. I must return to the minister's. I will tell him of the
count, and we shall soon know who he is."

"Take care," returned Albert; "no one has been able to accomplish that."

"Oh, we have three millions for our police; it is true they are almost
always spent beforehand, but, no matter, we shall still have fifty
thousand francs to spend for this purpose."

"And when you know, will you tell me?"

"I promise you. _Au revoir_, Albert. Gentlemen, good morning."

As he left the room, Debray called out loudly, "My carriage."

"Bravo," said Beauchamp to Albert; "I shall not go to the Chamber, but I
have something better to offer my readers than a speech of M. Danglars."

"For heaven's sake, Beauchamp," returned Morcerf, "do not deprive me of
the merit of introducing him everywhere. Is he not peculiar?"

"He is more than that," replied Château-Renaud; "he is one of the most
extraordinary men I ever saw in my life. Are you coming, Morrel?"

"Directly I have given my card to the count, who has promised to pay us
a visit at Rue Meslay, No. 14."

"Be sure I shall not fail to do so," returned the count, bowing. And
Maximilian Morrel left the room with the Baron de Château-Renaud,
leaving Monte Cristo alone with Morcerf.



Chapter 41. The Presentation

When Albert found himself alone with Monte Cristo, "My dear count," said
he, "allow me to commence my services as _cicerone_ by showing you a
specimen of a bachelor's apartment. You, who are accustomed to the
palaces of Italy, can amuse yourself by calculating in how many square
feet a young man who is not the worst lodged in Paris can live. As we
pass from one room to another, I will open the windows to let you
breathe." Monte Cristo had already seen the breakfast-room and the salon
on the ground floor. Albert led him first to his _atelier_, which was,
as we have said, his favorite apartment. Monte Cristo quickly
appreciated all that Albert had collected here--old cabinets, Japanese
porcelain, Oriental stuffs, Venetian glass, arms from all parts of the
world--everything was familiar to him; and at the first glance he
recognized their date, their country, and their origin. Morcerf had
expected he should be the guide; on the contrary, it was he who, under
the count's guidance, followed a course of archæology, mineralogy, and
natural history. They descended to the first floor; Albert led his guest
into the salon. The salon was filled with the works of modern artists;
there were landscapes by Dupré, with their long reeds and tall trees,
their lowing oxen and marvellous skies; Delacroix's Arabian cavaliers,
with their long white burnouses, their shining belts, their damasked
arms, their horses, who tore each other with their teeth while their
riders contended fiercely with their maces; _aquarelles_ of Boulanger,
representing Notre Dame de Paris with that vigor that makes the artist
the rival of the poet; there were paintings by Diaz, who makes his
flowers more beautiful than flowers, his suns more brilliant than the
sun; designs by Decamp, as vividly colored as those of Salvator Rosa,
but more poetic; _pastels_ by Giraud and Müller, representing children
like angels and women with the features of a virgin; sketches torn from
the album of Dauzats' "Travels in the East," that had been made in a few
seconds on the saddle of a camel, or beneath the dome of a mosque--in a
word, all that modern art can give in exchange and as recompense for the
art lost and gone with ages long since past.

Albert expected to have something new this time to show to the
traveller, but, to his great surprise, the latter, without seeking for
the signatures, many of which, indeed, were only initials, named
instantly the author of every picture in such a manner that it was easy
to see that each name was not only known to him, but that each style
associated with it had been appreciated and studied by him. From the
salon they passed into the bedchamber; it was a model of taste and
simple elegance. A single portrait, signed by Leopold Robert, shone in
its carved and gilded frame. This portrait attracted the Count of Monte
Cristo's attention, for he made three rapid steps in the chamber, and
stopped suddenly before it. It was the portrait of a young woman of five
or six and twenty, with a dark complexion, and light and lustrous eyes,
veiled beneath long lashes. She wore the picturesque costume of the
Catalan fisherwomen, a red and black bodice, and golden pins in her
hair. She was looking at the sea, and her form was outlined on the blue
ocean and sky. The light was so faint in the room that Albert did not
perceive the pallor that spread itself over the count's visage, or the
nervous heaving of his chest and shoulders. Silence prevailed for an
instant, during which Monte Cristo gazed intently on the picture.

"You have there a most charming mistress, viscount," said the count in a
perfectly calm tone; "and this costume--a ball costume, doubtless--
becomes her admirably."

"Ah, monsieur," returned Albert, "I would never forgive you this mistake
if you had seen another picture beside this. You do not know my mother;
she it is whom you see here. She had her portrait painted thus six or
eight years ago. This costume is a fancy one, it appears, and the
resemblance is so great that I think I still see my mother the same as
she was in 1830. The countess had this portrait painted during the
count's absence. She doubtless intended giving him an agreeable
surprise; but, strange to say, this portrait seemed to displease my
father, and the value of the picture, which is, as you see, one of the
best works of Leopold Robert, could not overcome his dislike to it. It
is true, between ourselves, that M. de Morcerf is one of the most
assiduous peers at the Luxembourg, a general renowned for theory, but a
most mediocre amateur of art. It is different with my mother, who paints
exceedingly well, and who, unwilling to part with so valuable a picture,
gave it to me to put here, where it would be less likely to displease M.
de Morcerf, whose portrait, by Gros, I will also show you. Excuse my
talking of family matters, but as I shall have the honor of introducing
you to the count, I tell you this to prevent you making any allusions to
this picture. The picture seems to have a malign influence, for my
mother rarely comes here without looking at it, and still more rarely
does she look at it without weeping. This disagreement is the only one
that has ever taken place between the count and countess, who are still
as much united, although married more than twenty years, as on the first
day of their wedding."


Monte Cristo glanced rapidly at Albert, as if to seek a hidden meaning
in his words, but it was evident the young man uttered them in the
simplicity of his heart. "Now," said Albert, "that you have seen all my
treasures, allow me to offer them to you, unworthy as they are. Consider
yourself as in your own house, and to put yourself still more at your
ease, pray accompany me to the apartments of M. de Morcerf, he whom I
wrote from Rome an account of the services you rendered me, and to whom
I announced your promised visit, and I may say that both the count and
countess anxiously desire to thank you in person. You are somewhat
_blasé_ I know, and family scenes have not much effect on Sinbad the
Sailor, who has seen so many others. However, accept what I propose to
you as an initiation into Parisian life--a life of politeness, visiting,
and introductions." Monte Cristo bowed without making any answer; he
accepted the offer without enthusiasm and without regret, as one of
those conventions of society which every gentleman looks upon as a duty.
Albert summoned his servant, and ordered him to acquaint M. and Madame
de Morcerf of the arrival of the Count of Monte Cristo. Albert followed
him with the count. When they arrived at the antechamber, above the door
was visible a shield, which, by its rich ornaments and its harmony with
the rest of the furniture, indicated the importance the owner attached
to this blazon. Monte Cristo stopped and examined it attentively.

"Azure seven merlets, or, placed bender," said he. "These are,
doubtless, your family arms? Except the knowledge of blazons, that
enables me to decipher them, I am very ignorant of heraldry--I, a count
of a fresh creation, fabricated in Tuscany by the aid of a commandery of
St. Stephen, and who would not have taken the trouble had I not been
told that when you travel much it is necessary. Besides, you must have
something on the panels of your carriage, to escape being searched by
the custom-house officers. Excuse my putting such a question to you."

