to his carriage, and drove to Danglars' house.

"Has your husband any Spanish bonds?" he asked of the baroness.

"I think so, indeed! He has six millions' worth."

"He must sell them at whatever price."

"Why?"

"Because Don Carlos has fled from Bourges, and has returned to Spain."


"How do you know?" Debray shrugged his shoulders. "The idea of asking
how I hear the news," he said. The baroness did not wait for a
repetition; she ran to her husband, who immediately hastened to his
agent, and ordered him to sell at any price. When it was seen that
Danglars sold, the Spanish funds fell directly. Danglars lost five
hundred thousand francs; but he rid himself of all his Spanish shares.
The same evening the following was read in _Le Messager_:

"[By telegraph.] The king, Don Carlos, has escaped the vigilance of his
guardians at Bourges, and has returned to Spain by the Catalonian
frontier. Barcelona has risen in his favor."

All that evening nothing was spoken of but the foresight of Danglars,
who had sold his shares, and of the luck of the stock-jobber, who only
lost five hundred thousand francs by such a blow. Those who had kept
their shares, or bought those of Danglars, looked upon themselves as
ruined, and passed a very bad night. Next morning _Le Moniteur_
contained the following:

"It was without any foundation that _Le Messager_ yesterday announced
the flight of Don Carlos and the revolt of Barcelona. The king (Don
Carlos) has not left Bourges, and the peninsula is in the enjoyment of
profound peace. A telegraphic signal, improperly interpreted, owing to
the fog, was the cause of this error."

The funds rose one per cent higher than before they had fallen. This,
reckoning his loss, and what he had missed gaining, made the difference
of a million to Danglars. "Good," said Monte Cristo to Morrel, who was
at his house when the news arrived of the strange reverse of fortune of
which Danglars had been the victim, "I have just made a discovery for
twenty-five thousand francs, for which I would have paid a hundred
thousand."

"What have you discovered?" asked Morrel.

"I have just discovered how a gardener may get rid of the dormice that
eat his peaches."



Chapter 62. Ghosts

At first sight, the exterior of the house at Auteuil gave no indications
of splendor, nothing one would expect from the destined residence of the
magnificent Count of Monte Cristo; but this simplicity was according to
the will of its master, who positively ordered nothing to be altered
outside. The splendor was within. Indeed, almost before the door opened,
the scene changed. M. Bertuccio had outdone himself in the taste
displayed in furnishing, and in the rapidity with which it was executed.
It is told that the Duc d'Antin removed in a single night a whole avenue
of trees that annoyed Louis XIV.; in three days M. Bertuccio planted an
entirely bare court with poplars, large spreading sycamores to shade the
different parts of the house, and in the foreground, instead of the
usual paving-stones, half hidden by the grass, there extended a lawn but
that morning laid down, and upon which the water was yet glistening. For
the rest, the orders had been issued by the count; he himself had given
a plan to Bertuccio, marking the spot where each tree was to be planted,
and the shape and extent of the lawn which was to take the place of the
paving-stones. Thus the house had become unrecognizable, and Bertuccio
himself declared that he scarcely knew it, encircled as it was by a
framework of trees. The overseer would not have objected, while he was
about it, to have made some improvements in the garden, but the count
had positively forbidden it to be touched. Bertuccio made amends,
however, by loading the antechambers, staircases, and mantle-pieces with
flowers.

What, above all, manifested the shrewdness of the steward, and the
profound science of the master, the one in carrying out the ideas of the
other, was that this house which appeared only the night before so sad
and gloomy, impregnated with that sickly smell one can almost fancy to
be the smell of time, had in a single day acquired the aspect of life,
was scented with its master's favorite perfumes, and had the very light
regulated according to his wish. When the count arrived, he had under
his touch his books and arms, his eyes rested upon his favorite
pictures; his dogs, whose caresses he loved, welcomed him in the
antechamber; the birds, whose songs delighted him, cheered him with
their music; and the house, awakened from its long sleep, like the
sleeping beauty in the wood, lived, sang, and bloomed like the houses we
have long cherished, and in which, when we are forced to leave them, we
leave a part of our souls. The servants passed gayly along the fine
courtyard; some, belonging to the kitchens, gliding down the stairs,
restored but the previous day, as if they had always inhabited the
house; others filling the coach-houses, where the equipages, encased and
numbered, appeared to have been installed for the last fifty years; and
in the stables the horses replied with neighs to the grooms, who spoke
to them with much more respect than many servants pay their masters.

The library was divided into two parts on either side of the wall, and
contained upwards of two thousand volumes; one division was entirely
devoted to novels, and even the volume which had been published but the
day before was to be seen in its place in all the dignity of its red and
gold binding. On the other side of the house, to match with the library,
was the conservatory, ornamented with rare flowers, that bloomed in
china jars; and in the midst of the greenhouse, marvellous alike to
sight and smell, was a billiard-table which looked as if it had been
abandoned during the past hour by players who had left the balls on the
cloth. One chamber alone had been respected by the magnificent
Bertuccio. Before this room, to which you could ascend by the grand, and
go out by the back staircase, the servants passed with curiosity, and
Bertuccio with terror. At five o'clock precisely, the count arrived
before the house at Auteuil, followed by Ali. Bertuccio was awaiting
this arrival with impatience, mingled with uneasiness; he hoped for some
compliments, while, at the same time, he feared to have frowns. Monte
Cristo descended into the courtyard, walked all over the house, without
giving any sign of approbation or pleasure, until he entered his
bedroom, situated on the opposite side to the closed room; then he
approached a little piece of furniture, made of rosewood, which he had
noticed at a previous visit. "That can only be to hold gloves," he said.

"Will your excellency deign to open it?" said the delighted Bertuccio,
"and you will find gloves in it." Elsewhere the count found everything
he required--smelling-bottles, cigars, knick-knacks.


"Good," he said; and M. Bertuccio left enraptured, so great, so
powerful, and real was the influence exercised by this man over all who
surrounded him. At precisely six o'clock the clatter of horses' hoofs
was heard at the entrance door; it was our captain of Spahis, who had
arrived on Médéah. "I am sure I am the first," cried Morrel; "I did it
on purpose to have you a minute to myself, before everyone came. Julie
and Emmanuel have a thousand things to tell you. Ah, really this is
magnificent! But tell me, count, will your people take care of my
horse?"

"Do not alarm yourself, my dear Maximilian--they understand."

"I mean, because he wants petting. If you had seen at what a pace he
came--like the wind!"

"I should think so,--a horse that cost 5,000 francs!" said Monte Cristo,
in the tone which a father would use towards a son.

"Do you regret them?" asked Morrel, with his open laugh.

"I? Certainly not," replied the count. "No; I should only regret if the
horse had not proved good."

"It is so good, that I have distanced M. de Château-Renaud, one of the
best riders in France, and M. Debray, who both mount the minister's
Arabians; and close on their heels are the horses of Madame Danglars,
who always go at six leagues an hour."

"Then they follow you?" asked Monte Cristo.

"See, they are here." And at the same minute a carriage with smoking
horses, accompanied by two mounted gentlemen, arrived at the gate, which
opened before them. The carriage drove round, and stopped at the steps,
followed by the horsemen. The instant Debray had touched the ground, he
was at the carriage-door. He offered his hand to the baroness, who,
descending, took it with a peculiarity of manner imperceptible to
everyone but Monte Cristo. But nothing escaped the count's notice, and
he observed a little note, passed with the facility that indicates
frequent practice, from the hand of Madame Danglars to that of the
minister's secretary. After his wife the banker descended, as pale as
though he had issued from his tomb instead of his carriage. Madame
Danglars threw a rapid and inquiring glance which could only be
interpreted by Monte Cristo, around the courtyard, over the peristyle,
and across the front of the house, then, repressing a slight emotion,
which must have been seen on her countenance if she had not kept her
color, she ascended the steps, saying to Morrel, "Sir, if you were a
friend of mine, I should ask you if you would sell your horse."

Morrel smiled with an expression very like a grimace, and then turned
round to Monte Cristo, as if to ask him to extricate him from his
embarrassment. The count understood him. "Ah, madame," he said, "why did
you not make that request of me?"

"With you, sir," replied the baroness, "one can wish for nothing, one is
so sure to obtain it. If it were so with M. Morrel----"

"Unfortunately," replied the count, "I am witness that M. Morrel cannot
give up his horse, his honor being engaged in keeping it."

"How so?"

"He laid a wager he would tame Médéah in the space of six months. You
understand now that if he were to get rid of the animal before the time
named, he would not only lose his bet, but people would say he was
afraid; and a brave captain of Spahis cannot risk this, even to gratify
a pretty woman, which is, in my opinion, one of the most sacred
obligations in the world."

"You see my position, madame," said Morrel, bestowing a grateful smile
on Monte Cristo.

"It seems to me," said Danglars, in his coarse tone, ill-concealed by a
forced smile, "that you have already got horses enough." Madame Danglars
