Quesnel, Villefort trembled.

"Everything points to the conclusion, sire," said the minister of
police, "that death was not the result of suicide, as we first believed,
but of assassination. General Quesnel, it appears, had just left a
Bonapartist club when he disappeared. An unknown person had been with
him that morning, and made an appointment with him in the Rue Saint-
Jacques; unfortunately, the general's valet, who was dressing his hair
at the moment when the stranger entered, heard the street mentioned, but
did not catch the number." As the police minister related this to the
king, Villefort, who looked as if his very life hung on the speaker's
lips, turned alternately red and pale. The king looked towards him.

"Do you not think with me, M. de Villefort, that General Quesnel, whom
they believed attached to the usurper, but who was really entirely
devoted to me, has perished the victim of a Bonapartist ambush?"

"It is probable, sire," replied Villefort. "But is this all that is
known?"

"They are on the track of the man who appointed the meeting with him."

"On his track?" said Villefort.

"Yes, the servant has given his description. He is a man of from fifty
to fifty-two years of age, dark, with black eyes covered with shaggy
eyebrows, and a thick moustache. He was dressed in a blue frock-coat,
buttoned up to the chin, and wore at his button-hole the rosette of an
officer of the Legion of Honor. Yesterday a person exactly corresponding
with this description was followed, but he was lost sight of at the
corner of the Rue de la Jussienne and the Rue Coq-Héron." Villefort
leaned on the back of an armchair, for as the minister of police went on
speaking he felt his legs bend under him; but when he learned that the
unknown had escaped the vigilance of the agent who followed him, he
breathed again.

"Continue to seek for this man, sir," said the king to the minister of
police; "for if, as I am all but convinced, General Quesnel, who would
have been so useful to us at this moment, has been murdered, his
assassins, Bonapartists or not, shall be cruelly punished." It required
all Villefort's coolness not to betray the terror with which this
declaration of the king inspired him.

"How strange," continued the king, with some asperity; "the police think
that they have disposed of the whole matter when they say, 'A murder has
been committed,' and especially so when they can add, 'And we are on the
track of the guilty persons.'"

"Sire, your majesty will, I trust, be amply satisfied on this point at
least."

"We shall see. I will no longer detain you, M. de Villefort, for you
must be fatigued after so long a journey; go and rest. Of course you
stopped at your father's?" A feeling of faintness came over Villefort.


"No, sire," he replied, "I alighted at the Hotel de Madrid, in the Rue
de Tournon."

"But you have seen him?"

"Sire, I went straight to the Duc de Blacas."

"But you will see him, then?"

"I think not, sire."

"Ah, I forgot," said Louis, smiling in a manner which proved that all
these questions were not made without a motive; "I forgot you and M.
Noirtier are not on the best terms possible, and that is another
sacrifice made to the royal cause, and for which you should be
recompensed."

"Sire, the kindness your majesty deigns to evince towards me is a
recompense which so far surpasses my utmost ambition that I have nothing
more to ask for."

"Never mind, sir, we will not forget you; make your mind easy. In the
meanwhile" (the king here detached the cross of the Legion of Honor
which he usually wore over his blue coat, near the cross of St. Louis,
above the order of Notre-Dame-du-Mont-Carmel and St. Lazare, and gave it
to Villefort)--"in the meanwhile take this cross."

"Sire," said Villefort, "your majesty mistakes; this is an officer's
cross."

"_Ma foi!_" said Louis XVIII., "take it, such as it is, for I have not
the time to procure you another. Blacas, let it be your care to see that
the brevet is made out and sent to M. de Villefort." Villefort's eyes
were filled with tears of joy and pride; he took the cross and kissed
it.

"And now," he said, "may I inquire what are the orders with which your
majesty deigns to honor me?"

"Take what rest you require, and remember that if you are not able to
serve me here in Paris, you may be of the greatest service to me at
Marseilles."

"Sire," replied Villefort, bowing, "in an hour I shall have quitted
Paris."

"Go, sir," said the king; "and should I forget you (kings' memories are
short), do not be afraid to bring yourself to my recollection. Baron,
send for the minister of war. Blacas, remain."

"Ah, sir," said the minister of police to Villefort, as they left the
Tuileries, "you entered by luck's door--your fortune is made."

"Will it be long first?" muttered Villefort, saluting the minister,
whose career was ended, and looking about him for a hackney-coach. One
passed at the moment, which he hailed; he gave his address to the
driver, and springing in, threw himself on the seat, and gave loose to
dreams of ambition.

Ten minutes afterwards Villefort reached his hotel, ordered horses to be
ready in two hours, and asked to have his breakfast brought to him. He
was about to begin his repast when the sound of the bell rang sharp and
loud. The valet opened the door, and Villefort heard someone speak his
name.


"Who could know that I was here already?" said the young man. The valet
entered.

"Well," said Villefort, "what is it?--Who rang?--Who asked for me?"

"A stranger who will not send in his name."

"A stranger who will not send in his name! What can he want with me?"

"He wishes to speak to you."

"To me?"

"Yes."

"Did he mention my name?"

"Yes."

"What sort of person is he?"

"Why, sir, a man of about fifty."

"Short or tall?"

"About your own height, sir."

"Dark or fair?"

"Dark,--very dark; with black eyes, black hair, black eyebrows."

"And how dressed?" asked Villefort quickly.

"In a blue frock-coat, buttoned up close, decorated with the Legion of
Honor."

"It is he!" said Villefort, turning pale.


"Eh, _pardieu!_" said the individual whose description we have twice
given, entering the door, "what a great deal of ceremony! Is it the
custom in Marseilles for sons to keep their fathers waiting in their
anterooms?"

"Father!" cried Villefort, "then I was not deceived; I felt sure it must
be you."

"Well, then, if you felt so sure," replied the new-comer, putting his
cane in a corner and his hat on a chair, "allow me to say, my dear
Gérard, that it was not very filial of you to keep me waiting at the
door."

"Leave us, Germain," said Villefort. The servant quitted the apartment
with evident signs of astonishment.



Chapter 12. Father and Son

M. Noirtier--for it was, indeed, he who entered--looked after the
servant until the door was closed, and then, fearing, no doubt, that he
might be overheard in the antechamber, he opened the door again, nor was
the precaution useless, as appeared from the rapid retreat of Germain,
who proved that he was not exempt from the sin which ruined our first
parents. M. Noirtier then took the trouble to close and bolt the
antechamber door, then that of the bedchamber, and then extended his
hand to Villefort, who had followed all his motions with surprise which
he could not conceal.

"Well, now, my dear Gérard," said he to the young man, with a very
significant look, "do you know, you seem as if you were not very glad to
see me?"

"My dear father," said Villefort, "I am, on the contrary, delighted; but
I so little expected your visit, that it has somewhat overcome me."

"But, my dear fellow," replied M. Noirtier, seating himself, "I might
say the same thing to you, when you announce to me your wedding for the
