heart, and looked through the small opening in the gate; there was yet
no one to be seen.

The clock struck half-past eight, and still another half-hour was passed
in waiting, while Morrel walked to and fro, and gazed more and more
frequently through the opening. The garden became darker still, but in
the darkness he looked in vain for the white dress, and in the silence
he vainly listened for the sound of footsteps. The house, which was
discernible through the trees, remained in darkness, and gave no
indication that so important an event as the signature of a marriage-
contract was going on. Morrel looked at his watch, which wanted a
quarter to ten; but soon the same clock he had already heard strike two
or three times rectified the error by striking half-past nine.

This was already half an hour past the time Valentine had fixed. It was
a terrible moment for the young man. The slightest rustling of the
foliage, the least whistling of the wind, attracted his attention, and
drew the perspiration to his brow; then he tremblingly fixed his ladder,
and, not to lose a moment, placed his foot on the first step. Amidst all
these alternations of hope and fear, the clock struck ten. "It is
impossible," said Maximilian, "that the signing of a contract should
occupy so long a time without unexpected interruptions. I have weighed
all the chances, calculated the time required for all the forms;
something must have happened." And then he walked rapidly to and fro,
and pressed his burning forehead against the fence. Had Valentine
fainted? or had she been discovered and stopped in her flight? These
were the only obstacles which appeared possible to the young man.

The idea that her strength had failed her in attempting to escape, and
that she had fainted in one of the paths, was the one that most
impressed itself upon his mind. "In that case," said he, "I should lose
her, and by my own fault." He dwelt on this idea for a moment, then it
appeared reality. He even thought he could perceive something on the
ground at a distance; he ventured to call, and it seemed to him that the
wind wafted back an almost inarticulate sigh.

At last the half-hour struck. It was impossible to wait longer, his
temples throbbed violently, his eyes were growing dim; he passed one leg
over the wall, and in a moment leaped down on the other side. He was on
Villefort's premises--had arrived there by scaling the wall. What might
be the consequences? However, he had not ventured thus far to draw back.
He followed a short distance close under the wall, then crossed a path,
hid entered a clump of trees. In a moment he had passed through them,
and could see the house distinctly.

Then Morrel saw that he had been right in believing that the house was
not illuminated. Instead of lights at every window, as is customary on
days of ceremony, he saw only a gray mass, which was veiled also by a
cloud, which at that moment obscured the moon's feeble light. A light
moved rapidly from time to time past three windows of the second floor.
These three windows were in Madame de Saint-Méran's room. Another
remained motionless behind some red curtains which were in Madame de
Villefort's bedroom. Morrel guessed all this. So many times, in order to
follow Valentine in thought at every hour in the day, had he made her
describe the whole house, that without having seen it he knew it all.

This darkness and silence alarmed Morrel still more than Valentine's
absence had done. Almost mad with grief, and determined to venture
everything in order to see Valentine once more, and be certain of the
misfortune he feared, Morrel gained the edge of the clump of trees, and
was going to pass as quickly as possible through the flower-garden, when
the sound of a voice, still at some distance, but which was borne upon
the wind, reached him. At this sound, as he was already partially
exposed to view, he stepped back and concealed himself completely,
remaining perfectly motionless.

He had formed his resolution. If it was Valentine alone, he would speak
as she passed; if she was accompanied, and he could not speak, still he
should see her, and know that she was safe; if they were strangers, he
would listen to their conversation, and might understand something of
this hitherto incomprehensible mystery. The moon had just then escaped
from behind the cloud which had concealed it, and Morrel saw Villefort
come out upon the steps, followed by a gentleman in black. They
descended, and advanced towards the clump of trees, and Morrel soon
recognized the other gentleman as Doctor d'Avrigny.


The young man, seeing them approach, drew back mechanically, until he
found himself stopped by a sycamore-tree in the centre of the clump;
there he was compelled to remain. Soon the two gentlemen stopped also.

"Ah, my dear doctor," said the procureur, "heaven declares itself
against my house! What a dreadful death--what a blow! Seek not to
console me; alas, nothing can alleviate so great a sorrow--the wound is
too deep and too fresh! Dead, dead!" The cold sweat sprang to the young
man's brow, and his teeth chattered. Who could be dead in that house,
which Villefort himself had called accursed? "My dear M. de Villefort,"
replied the doctor, with a tone which redoubled the terror of the young
man, "I have not led you here to console you; on the contrary----"

"What can you mean?" asked the procureur, alarmed.

"I mean that behind the misfortune which has just happened to you, there
is another, perhaps, still greater."

"Can it be possible?" murmured Villefort, clasping his hands. "What are
you going to tell me?"

"Are we quite alone, my friend?"

"Yes, quite; but why all these precautions?"

"Because I have a terrible secret to communicate to you," said the
doctor. "Let us sit down."

Villefort fell, rather than seated himself. The doctor stood before him,
with one hand placed on his shoulder. Morrel, horrified, supported his
head with one hand, and with the other pressed his heart, lest its
beatings should be heard. "Dead, dead!" repeated he within himself; and
he felt as if he were also dying.

"Speak, doctor--I am listening," said Villefort; "strike--I am prepared
for everything!"

"Madame de Saint-Méran was, doubtless, advancing in years, but she
enjoyed excellent health." Morrel began again to breathe freely, which
he had not done during the last ten minutes.

"Grief has consumed her," said Villefort--"yes, grief, doctor! After
living forty years with the marquis----"

"It is not grief, my dear Villefort," said the doctor; "grief may kill,
although it rarely does, and never in a day, never in an hour, never in
ten minutes." Villefort answered nothing, he simply raised his head,
which had been cast down before, and looked at the doctor with
amazement.

"Were you present during the last struggle?" asked M. d'Avrigny.

"I was," replied the procureur; "you begged me not to leave."

"Did you notice the symptoms of the disease to which Madame de Saint-
Méran has fallen a victim?"

"I did. Madame de Saint-Méran had three successive attacks, at intervals
of some minutes, each one more serious than the former. When you
arrived, Madame de Saint-Méran had already been panting for breath some
minutes; she then had a fit, which I took to be simply a nervous attack,
and it was only when I saw her raise herself in the bed, and her limbs
and neck appear stiffened, that I became really alarmed. Then I
understood from your countenance there was more to fear than I had
thought. This crisis past, I endeavored to catch your eye, but could
not. You held her hand--you were feeling her pulse--and the second fit
came on before you had turned towards me. This was more terrible than
the first; the same nervous movements were repeated, and the mouth
contracted and turned purple."

"And at the third she expired."

"At the end of the first attack I discovered symptoms of tetanus; you
confirmed my opinion."

"Yes, before others," replied the doctor; "but now we are alone----"

"What are you going to say? Oh, spare me!"

"That the symptoms of tetanus and poisoning by vegetable substances are
the same." M. de Villefort started from his seat, then in a moment fell
down again, silent and motionless. Morrel knew not if he were dreaming
or awake. "Listen," said the doctor; "I know the full importance of the
statement I have just made, and the disposition of the man to whom I
have made it."


"Do you speak to me as a magistrate or as a friend?" asked Villefort.

"As a friend, and only as a friend, at this moment. The similarity in
the symptoms of tetanus and poisoning by vegetable substances is so
great, that were I obliged to affirm by oath what I have now stated, I
should hesitate; I therefore repeat to you, I speak not to a magistrate,
but to a friend. And to that friend I say, 'During the three-quarters of
an hour that the struggle continued, I watched the convulsions and the
death of Madame de Saint-Méran, and am thoroughly convinced that not
only did her death proceed from poison, but I could also specify the
poison.'"

"Can it be possible?"

"The symptoms are marked, do you see?--sleep broken by nervous spasms,
excitation of the brain, torpor of the nerve centres. Madame de Saint-
Méran succumbed to a powerful dose of brucine or of strychnine, which by
some mistake, perhaps, has been given to her." Villefort seized the
doctor's hand. "Oh, it is impossible," said he, "I must be dreaming! It
is frightful to hear such things from such a man as you! Tell me, I
entreat you, my dear doctor, that you may be deceived."

"Doubtless I may, but----"

"But?"


"But I do not think so."

"Have pity on me doctor! So many dreadful things have happened to me
lately that I am on the verge of madness."

"Has anyone besides me seen Madame de Saint-Méran?"

"No."

