
Chapter 99. The Law

We have seen how quietly Mademoiselle Danglars and Mademoiselle
d'Armilly accomplished their transformation and flight; the fact being
that everyone was too much occupied in his or her own affairs to think
of theirs. We will leave the banker contemplating the enormous magnitude
of his debt before the phantom of bankruptcy, and follow the baroness,
who after being momentarily crushed under the weight of the blow which
had struck her, had gone to seek her usual adviser, Lucien Debray. The
baroness had looked forward to this marriage as a means of ridding her
of a guardianship which, over a girl of Eugénie's character, could not
fail to be rather a troublesome undertaking; for in the tacit relations
which maintain the bond of family union, the mother, to maintain her
ascendancy over her daughter, must never fail to be a model of wisdom
and a type of perfection.

Now, Madame Danglars feared Eugénie's sagacity and the influence of
Mademoiselle d'Armilly; she had frequently observed the contemptuous
expression with which her daughter looked upon Debray,--an expression
which seemed to imply that she understood all her mother's amorous and
pecuniary relationships with the intimate secretary; moreover, she saw
that Eugénie detested Debray,--not only because he was a source of
dissension and scandal under the paternal roof, but because she had at
once classed him in that catalogue of bipeds whom Plato endeavors to
withdraw from the appellation of men, and whom Diogenes designated as
animals upon two legs without feathers.

Unfortunately, in this world of ours, each person views things through a
certain medium, and so is prevented from seeing in the same light as
others, and Madame Danglars, therefore, very much regretted that the
marriage of Eugénie had not taken place, not only because the match was
good, and likely to insure the happiness of her child, but because it
would also set her at liberty. She ran therefore to Debray, who, after
having like the rest of Paris witnessed the contract scene and the
scandal attending it, had retired in haste to his club, where he was
chatting with some friends upon the events which served as a subject of
conversation for three-fourths of that city known as the capital of the
world.

At the precise time when Madame Danglars, dressed in black and concealed
in a long veil, was ascending the stairs leading to Debray's
apartments,--notwithstanding the assurances of the concierge that the
young man was not at home,--Debray was occupied in repelling the
insinuations of a friend, who tried to persuade him that after the
terrible scene which had just taken place he ought, as a friend of the
family, to marry Mademoiselle Danglars and her two millions. Debray did
not defend himself very warmly, for the idea had sometimes crossed his
mind; still, when he recollected the independent, proud spirit of
Eugénie, he positively rejected it as utterly impossible, though the
same thought again continually recurred and found a resting-place in his
heart. Tea, play, and the conversation, which had become interesting
during the discussion of such serious affairs, lasted till one o'clock
in the morning.

Meanwhile Madame Danglars, veiled and uneasy, awaited the return of
Debray in the little green room, seated between two baskets of flowers,
which she had that morning sent, and which, it must be confessed, Debray
had himself arranged and watered with so much care that his absence was
half excused in the eyes of the poor woman.

At twenty minutes to twelve, Madame Danglars, tired of waiting, returned
home. Women of a certain grade are like prosperous grisettes in one
respect, they seldom return home after twelve o'clock. The baroness
returned to the hotel with as much caution as Eugénie used in leaving
it; she ran lightly upstairs, and with an aching heart entered her
apartment, contiguous, as we know, to that of Eugénie. She was fearful
of exciting any remark, and believed firmly in her daughter's innocence
and fidelity to the paternal roof. She listened at Eugénie's door, and
hearing no sound tried to enter, but the bolts were in place. Madame
Danglars then concluded that the young girl had been overcome with the
terrible excitement of the evening, and had gone to bed and to sleep.
She called the maid and questioned her.

"Mademoiselle Eugénie," said the maid, "retired to her apartment with
Mademoiselle d'Armilly; they then took tea together, after which they
desired me to leave, saying that they needed me no longer." Since then
the maid had been below, and like everyone else she thought the young
ladies were in their own room; Madame Danglars, therefore, went to bed
without a shadow of suspicion, and began to muse over the recent events.
In proportion as her memory became clearer, the occurrences of the
evening were revealed in their true light; what she had taken for
confusion was a tumult; what she had regarded as something distressing,
was in reality a disgrace. And then the baroness remembered that she had
felt no pity for poor Mercédès, who had been afflicted with as severe a
blow through her husband and son.

"Eugénie," she said to herself, "is lost, and so are we. The affair, as
it will be reported, will cover us with shame; for in a society such as
ours satire inflicts a painful and incurable wound. How fortunate that
Eugénie is possessed of that strange character which has so often made
me tremble!" And her glance was turned towards heaven, where a
mysterious Providence disposes all things, and out of a fault, nay, even
a vice, sometimes produces a blessing. And then her thoughts, cleaving
through space like a bird in the air, rested on Cavalcanti. This Andrea
was a wretch, a robber, an assassin, and yet his manners showed the
effects of a sort of education, if not a complete one; he had been
presented to the world with the appearance of an immense fortune,
supported by an honorable name. How could she extricate herself from
this labyrinth? To whom would she apply to help her out of this painful
situation? Debray, to whom she had run, with the first instinct of a
woman towards the man she loves, and who yet betrays her,--Debray could
but give her advice, she must apply to someone more powerful than he.

The baroness then thought of M. de Villefort. It was M. de Villefort who
had remorselessly brought misfortune into her family, as though they had
been strangers. But, no; on reflection, the procureur was not a
merciless man; and it was not the magistrate, slave to his duties, but
the friend, the loyal friend, who roughly but firmly cut into the very
core of the corruption; it was not the executioner, but the surgeon, who
wished to withdraw the honor of Danglars from ignominious association
with the disgraced young man they had presented to the world as their
son-in-law. And since Villefort, the friend of Danglars, had acted in
this way, no one could suppose that he had been previously acquainted
with, or had lent himself to, any of Andrea's intrigues. Villefort's
conduct, therefore, upon reflection, appeared to the baroness as if
shaped for their mutual advantage. But the inflexibility of the
procureur should stop there; she would see him the next day, and if she
could not make him fail in his duties as a magistrate, she would, at
least, obtain all the indulgence he could allow. She would invoke the
past, recall old recollections; she would supplicate him by the
remembrance of guilty, yet happy days. M. de Villefort would stifle the
affair; he had only to turn his eyes on one side, and allow Andrea to
fly, and follow up the crime under that shadow of guilt called contempt
of court. And after this reasoning she slept easily.

At nine o'clock next morning she arose, and without ringing for her maid
or giving the least sign of her activity, she dressed herself in the
same simple style as on the previous night; then running downstairs, she
left the hotel, walked to the Rue de Provence, called a cab, and drove
to M. de Villefort's house. For the last month this wretched house had
presented the gloomy appearance of a lazaretto infected with the plague.
Some of the apartments were closed within and without; the shutters were
only opened to admit a minute's air, showing the scared face of a
footman, and immediately afterwards the window would be closed, like a
gravestone falling on a sepulchre, and the neighbors would say to each
other in a low voice, "Will there be another funeral today at the
procureur's house?" Madame Danglars involuntarily shuddered at the
desolate aspect of the mansion; descending from the cab, she approached
the door with trembling knees, and rang the bell. Three times did the
bell ring with a dull, heavy sound, seeming to participate, in the
general sadness, before the concierge appeared and peeped through the
door, which he opened just wide enough to allow his words to be heard.
He saw a lady, a fashionable, elegantly dressed lady, and yet the door
remained almost closed.

"Do you intend opening the door?" said the baroness.

"First, madame, who are you?"

"Who am I? You know me well enough."

"We no longer know anyone, madame."

"You must be mad, my friend," said the baroness.

"Where do you come from?"

"Oh, this is too much!"

"Madame, these are my orders; excuse me. Your name?"

"The baroness Danglars; you have seen me twenty times."

"Possibly, madame. And now, what do you want?"

"Oh, how extraordinary! I shall complain to M. de Villefort of the
impertinence of his servants."

"Madame, this is precaution, not impertinence; no one enters here
without an order from M. d'Avrigny, or without speaking to the
procureur."

"Well, I have business with the procureur."

"Is it pressing business?"

"You can imagine so, since I have not even brought my carriage out yet.
But enough of this--here is my card, take it to your master."

"Madame will await my return?"

"Yes; go." The concierge closed the door, leaving Madame Danglars in the
street. She had not long to wait; directly afterwards the door was
opened wide enough to admit her, and when she had passed through, it was
again shut. Without losing sight of her for an instant, the concierge
took a whistle from his pocket as soon as they entered the court, and
blew it. The valet de chambre appeared on the door-steps. "You will
excuse this poor fellow, madame," he said, as he preceded the baroness,
"but his orders are precise, and M. de Villefort begged me to tell you
that he could not act otherwise."

In the court showing his merchandise, was a tradesman who had been
admitted with the same precautions. The baroness ascended the steps; she
felt herself strongly infected with the sadness which seemed to magnify
her own, and still guided by the valet de chambre, who never lost sight
of her for an instant, she was introduced to the magistrate's study.
Preoccupied as Madame Danglars had been with the object of her visit,
the treatment she had received from these underlings appeared to her so
insulting, that she began by complaining of it. But Villefort, raising
