the Faubourg Saint-Honoré. Having crossed Paris, it passed through the
Faubourg du Temple, then leaving the exterior boulevards, it reached the
cemetery. More than fifty private carriages followed the twenty
mourning-coaches, and behind them more than five hundred persons joined
in the procession on foot.


These last consisted of all the young people whom Valentine's death had
struck like a thunderbolt, and who, notwithstanding the raw chilliness
of the season, could not refrain from paying a last tribute to the
memory of the beautiful, chaste, and adorable girl, thus cut off in the
flower of her youth. As they left Paris, an equipage with four horses,
at full speed, was seen to draw up suddenly; it contained Monte Cristo.
The count left the carriage and mingled in the crowd who followed on
foot. Château-Renaud perceived him and immediately alighting from his
_coupé_, joined him.

The count looked attentively through every opening in the crowd; he was
evidently watching for someone, but his search ended in disappointment.
"Where is Morrel?" he asked; "do either of these gentlemen know where he
is?"

"We have already asked that question," said Château-Renaud, "for none of
us has seen him." The count was silent, but continued to gaze around
him. At length they arrived at the cemetery. The piercing eye of Monte
Cristo glanced through clusters of bushes and trees, and was soon
relieved from all anxiety, for seeing a shadow glide between the yew-
trees, Monte Cristo recognized him whom he sought. One funeral is
generally very much like another in this magnificent metropolis. Black
figures are seen scattered over the long white avenues; the silence of
earth and heaven is alone broken by the noise made by the crackling
branches of hedges planted around the monuments; then follows the
melancholy chant of the priests, mingled now and then with a sob of
anguish, escaping from some woman concealed behind a mass of flowers.


The shadow Monte Cristo had noticed passed rapidly behind the tomb of
Abélard and Héloïse, placed itself close to the heads of the horses
belonging to the hearse, and following the undertaker's men, arrived
with them at the spot appointed for the burial. Each person's attention
was occupied. Monte Cristo saw nothing but the shadow, which no one else
observed. Twice the count left the ranks to see whether the object of
his interest had any concealed weapon beneath his clothes. When the
procession stopped, this shadow was recognized as Morrel, who, with his
coat buttoned up to his throat, his face livid, and convulsively
crushing his hat between his fingers, leaned against a tree, situated on
an elevation commanding the mausoleum, so that none of the funeral
details could escape his observation. Everything was conducted in the
usual manner. A few men, the least impressed of all by the scene,
pronounced a discourse, some deploring this premature death, others
expatiating on the grief of the father, and one very ingenious person
quoting the fact that Valentine had solicited pardon of her father for
criminals on whom the arm of justice was ready to fall--until at length
they exhausted their stores of metaphor and mournful speeches.

Monte Cristo heard and saw nothing, or rather he only saw Morrel, whose
calmness had a frightful effect on those who knew what was passing in
his heart. "See," said Beauchamp, pointing out Morrel to Debray. "What
is he doing up there?" And they called Château-Renaud's attention to
him.

"How pale he is!" said Château-Renaud, shuddering.

"He is cold," said Debray.

"Not at all," said Château-Renaud, slowly; "I think he is violently
agitated. He is very susceptible."

"Bah," said Debray; "he scarcely knew Mademoiselle de Villefort; you
said so yourself."


"True. Still I remember he danced three times with her at Madame de
Morcerf's. Do you recollect that ball, count, where you produced such an
effect?"

"No, I do not," replied Monte Cristo, without even knowing of what or to
whom he was speaking, so much was he occupied in watching Morrel, who
was holding his breath with emotion. "The discourse is over; farewell,
gentlemen," said the count. And he disappeared without anyone seeing
whither he went. The funeral being over, the guests returned to Paris.
Château-Renaud looked for a moment for Morrel; but while they were
watching the departure of the count, Morrel had quitted his post, and
Château-Renaud, failing in his search, joined Debray and Beauchamp.

Monte Cristo concealed himself behind a large tomb and awaited the
arrival of Morrel, who by degrees approached the tomb now abandoned by
spectators and workmen. Morrel threw a glance around, but before it
reached the spot occupied by Monte Cristo the latter had advanced yet
nearer, still unperceived. The young man knelt down. The count, with
outstretched neck and glaring eyes, stood in an attitude ready to pounce
upon Morrel upon the first occasion. Morrel bent his head till it
touched the stone, then clutching the grating with both hands, he
murmured,--"Oh, Valentine!" The count's heart was pierced by the
utterance of these two words; he stepped forward, and touching the young
man's shoulder, said,--"I was looking for you, my friend." Monte Cristo
expected a burst of passion, but he was deceived, for Morrel turning
round, said calmly,--

"You see I was praying." The scrutinizing glance of the count searched
the young man from head to foot. He then seemed more easy.

"Shall I drive you back to Paris?" he asked.

"No, thank you."

"Do you wish anything?"

"Leave me to pray." The count withdrew without opposition, but it was
only to place himself in a situation where he could watch every movement
of Morrel, who at length arose, brushed the dust from his knees, and
turned towards Paris, without once looking back. He walked slowly down
the Rue de la Roquette. The count, dismissing his carriage, followed him
about a hundred paces behind. Maximilian crossed the canal and entered
the Rue Meslay by the boulevards. Five minutes after the door had been
closed on Morrel's entrance, it was again opened for the count. Julie
was at the entrance of the garden, where she was attentively watching
Penelon, who, entering with zeal into his profession of gardener, was
very busy grafting some Bengal roses. "Ah, count," she exclaimed, with
the delight manifested by every member of the family whenever he visited
the Rue Meslay.

"Maximilian has just returned, has he not, madame?" asked the count.


"Yes, I think I saw him pass; but pray, call Emmanuel."

"Excuse me, madame, but I must go up to Maximilian's room this instant,"
replied Monte Cristo, "I have something of the greatest importance to
tell him."

"Go, then," she said with a charming smile, which accompanied him until
he had disappeared. Monte Cristo soon ran up the staircase conducting
from the ground floor to Maximilian's room; when he reached the landing
he listened attentively, but all was still. Like many old houses
occupied by a single family, the room door was panelled with glass; but
it was locked, Maximilian was shut in, and it was impossible to see what
was passing in the room, because a red curtain was drawn before the
glass. The count's anxiety was manifested by a bright color which seldom
appeared on the face of that imperturbable man.

"What shall I do!" he uttered, and reflected for a moment; "shall I
ring? No, the sound of a bell, announcing a visitor, will but accelerate
the resolution of one in Maximilian's situation, and then the bell would
be followed by a louder noise." Monte Cristo trembled from head to foot
and as if his determination had been taken with the rapidity of
lightning, he struck one of the panes of glass with his elbow; the glass
was shivered to atoms, then withdrawing the curtain he saw Morrel, who
had been writing at his desk, bound from his seat at the noise of the
broken window.

"I beg a thousand pardons," said the count, "there is nothing the
matter, but I slipped down and broke one of your panes of glass with my
elbow. Since it is opened, I will take advantage of it to enter your
room; do not disturb yourself--do not disturb yourself!" And passing his
hand through the broken glass, the count opened the door. Morrel,
evidently discomposed, came to meet Monte Cristo less with the intention
of receiving him than to exclude his entry. "_Ma foi_," said Monte
Cristo, rubbing his elbow, "it's all your servant's fault; your stairs
are so polished, it is like walking on glass."

"Are you hurt, sir?" coldly asked Morrel.

"I believe not. But what are you about there? You were writing."

"I?"

"Your fingers are stained with ink."

"Ah, true, I was writing. I do sometimes, soldier though I am."

Monte Cristo advanced into the room; Maximilian was obliged to let him
pass, but he followed him. "You were writing?" said Monte Cristo with a
searching look.

"I have already had the honor of telling you I was," said Morrel.

The count looked around him. "Your pistols are beside your desk," said
Monte Cristo, pointing with his finger to the pistols on the table.

"I am on the point of starting on a journey," replied Morrel
disdainfully.

"My friend," exclaimed Monte Cristo in a tone of exquisite sweetness.

"Sir?"

"My friend, my dear Maximilian, do not make a hasty resolution, I
entreat you."

"I make a hasty resolution?" said Morrel, shrugging his shoulders; "is
there anything extraordinary in a journey?"


"Maximilian," said the count, "let us both lay aside the mask we have
assumed. You no more deceive me with that false calmness than I impose
upon you with my frivolous solicitude. You can understand, can you not,
that to have acted as I have done, to have broken that glass, to have
intruded on the solitude of a friend--you can understand that, to have
done all this, I must have been actuated by real uneasiness, or rather
