received him on his sword and three times the general drew back on
finding himself too closely engaged, and then returned to the charge. At
the third he fell again. They thought he slipped, as at first, and the
witnesses, seeing he did not move, approached and endeavored to raise
him, but the one who passed his arm around the body found it was
moistened with blood. The general, who had almost fainted, revived.
"Ah," said he, "they have sent some fencing-master to fight with me."
The president, without answering, approached the witness who held the
lantern, and raising his sleeve, showed him two wounds he had received
in his arm; then opening his coat, and unbuttoning his waistcoat,
displayed his side, pierced with a third wound. Still he had not even
uttered a sigh. General d'Epinay died five minutes after.'"

Franz read these last words in a voice so choked that they were hardly
audible, and then stopped, passing his hand over his eyes as if to
dispel a cloud; but after a moment's silence, he continued:--

"'The president went up the steps, after pushing his sword into his
cane; a track of blood on the snow marked his course. He had scarcely
arrived at the top when he heard a heavy splash in the water--it was the
general's body, which the witnesses had just thrown into the river after
ascertaining that he was dead. The general fell, then, in a loyal duel,
and not in ambush as it might have been reported. In proof of this we
have signed this paper to establish the truth of the facts, lest the
moment should arrive when either of the actors in this terrible scene
should be accused of premeditated murder or of infringement of the laws
of honor.

"'Signed, Beaurepaire, Duchampy, and Lecharpal.'"

When Franz had finished reading this account, so dreadful for a son;
when Valentine, pale with emotion, had wiped away a tear; when
Villefort, trembling, and crouched in a corner, had endeavored to lessen
the storm by supplicating glances at the implacable old man,--"Sir,"
said d'Epinay to Noirtier, "since you are well acquainted with all these
details, which are attested by honorable signatures,--since you appear
to take some interest in me, although you have only manifested it
hitherto by causing me sorrow, refuse me not one final satisfaction--
tell me the name of the president of the club, that I may at least know
who killed my father." Villefort mechanically felt for the handle of the
door; Valentine, who understood sooner than anyone her grandfather's
answer, and who had often seen two scars upon his right arm, drew back a
few steps. "Mademoiselle," said Franz, turning towards Valentine, "unite
your efforts with mine to find out the name of the man who made me an
orphan at two years of age." Valentine remained dumb and motionless.

"Hold, sir," said Villefort, "do not prolong this dreadful scene. The
names have been purposely concealed; my father himself does not know who
this president was, and if he knows, he cannot tell you; proper names
are not in the dictionary."

"Oh, misery," cried Franz: "the only hope which sustained me and enabled
me to read to the end was that of knowing, at least, the name of him who
killed my father! Sir, sir," cried he, turning to Noirtier, "do what you
can--make me understand in some way!"

"Yes," replied Noirtier.

"Oh, mademoiselle,--mademoiselle!" cried Franz, "your grandfather says
he can indicate the person. Help me,--lend me your assistance!" Noirtier
looked at the dictionary. Franz took it with a nervous trembling, and
repeated the letters of the alphabet successively, until he came to M.
At that letter the old man signified "Yes."

"M," repeated Franz. The young man's finger, glided over the words, but
at each one Noirtier answered by a negative sign. Valentine hid her head
between her hands. At length, Franz arrived at the word MYSELF.


"Yes!"

"You?" cried Franz, whose hair stood on end; "you, M. Noirtier--you
killed my father?"

"Yes!" replied Noirtier, fixing a majestic look on the young man. Franz
fell powerless on a chair; Villefort opened the door and escaped, for
the idea had entered his mind to stifle the little remaining life in the
heart of this terrible old man.



Chapter 76. Progress of Cavalcanti the Younger

Meanwhile M. Cavalcanti the elder had returned to his service, not in
the army of his majesty the Emperor of Austria, but at the gaming-table
of the baths of Lucca, of which he was one of the most assiduous
courtiers. He had spent every farthing that had been allowed for his
journey as a reward for the majestic and solemn manner in which he had
maintained his assumed character of father.

M. Andrea at his departure inherited all the papers which proved that he
had indeed the honor of being the son of the Marquis Bartolomeo and the
Marchioness Oliva Corsinari. He was now fairly launched in that Parisian
society which gives such ready access to foreigners, and treats them,
not as they really are, but as they wish to be considered. Besides, what
is required of a young man in Paris? To speak its language tolerably, to
make a good appearance, to be a good gamester, and to pay in cash. They
are certainly less particular with a foreigner than with a Frenchman.
Andrea had, then, in a fortnight, attained a very fair position. He was
called count, he was said to possess 50,000 livres per annum; and his
father's immense riches, buried in the quarries of Saravezza, were a
constant theme. A learned man, before whom the last circumstance was
mentioned as a fact, declared he had seen the quarries in question,
which gave great weight to assertions hitherto somewhat doubtful, but
which now assumed the garb of reality.


Such was the state of society in Paris at the period we bring before our
readers, when Monte Cristo went one evening to pay M. Danglars a visit.
M. Danglars was out, but the count was asked to go and see the baroness,
and he accepted the invitation. It was never without a nervous shudder,
since the dinner at Auteuil, and the events which followed it, that
Madame Danglars heard Monte Cristo's name announced. If he did not come,
the painful sensation became most intense; if, on the contrary, he
appeared, his noble countenance, his brilliant eyes, his amiability, his
polite attention even towards Madame Danglars, soon dispelled every
impression of fear. It appeared impossible to the baroness that a man of
such delightfully pleasing manners should entertain evil designs against
her; besides, the most corrupt minds only suspect evil when it would
answer some interested end--useless injury is repugnant to every mind.
When Monte Cristo entered the boudoir, to which we have already once
introduced our readers, and where the baroness was examining some
drawings, which her daughter passed to her after having looked at them
with M. Cavalcanti, his presence soon produced its usual effect, and it
was with smiles that the baroness received the count, although she had
been a little disconcerted at the announcement of his name. The latter
took in the whole scene at a glance.

The baroness was partially reclining on a sofa, Eugénie sat near her,
and Cavalcanti was standing. Cavalcanti, dressed in black, like one of
Goethe's heroes, with varnished shoes and white silk open-worked
stockings, passed a white and tolerably nice-looking hand through his
light hair, and so displayed a sparkling diamond, that in spite of Monte
Cristo's advice the vain young man had been unable to resist putting on
his little finger. This movement was accompanied by killing glances at
Mademoiselle Danglars, and by sighs launched in the same direction.
Mademoiselle Danglars was still the same--cold, beautiful, and
satirical. Not one of these glances, nor one sigh, was lost on her; they
might have been said to fall on the shield of Minerva, which some
philosophers assert protected sometimes the breast of Sappho. Eugénie
bowed coldly to the count, and availed herself of the first moment when
the conversation became earnest to escape to her study, whence very soon
two cheerful and noisy voices being heard in connection with occasional
notes of the piano assured Monte Cristo that Mademoiselle Danglars
preferred to his society and to that of M. Cavalcanti the company of
Mademoiselle Louise d'Armilly, her singing teacher.

It was then, especially while conversing with Madame Danglars, and
apparently absorbed by the charm of the conversation, that the count
noticed M. Andrea Cavalcanti's solicitude, his manner of listening to
the music at the door he dared not pass, and of manifesting his
admiration. The banker soon returned. His first look was certainly
directed towards Monte Cristo, but the second was for Andrea. As for his
wife, he bowed to her, as some husbands do to their wives, but in a way
that bachelors will never comprehend, until a very extensive code is
published on conjugal life.

"Have not the ladies invited you to join them at the piano?" said
Danglars to Andrea. "Alas, no, sir," replied Andrea with a sigh, still
more remarkable than the former ones. Danglars immediately advanced
towards the door and opened it.


The two young ladies were seen seated on the same chair, at the piano,
accompanying themselves, each with one hand, a fancy to which they had
accustomed themselves, and performed admirably. Mademoiselle d'Armilly,
whom they then perceived through the open doorway, formed with Eugénie
one of the _tableaux vivants_ of which the Germans are so fond. She was
somewhat beautiful, and exquisitely formed--a little fairy-like figure,
with large curls falling on her neck, which was rather too long, as
Perugino sometimes makes his Virgins, and her eyes dull from fatigue.
She was said to have a weak chest, and like Antonia in the _Cremona
Violin_, she would die one day while singing. Monte Cristo cast one
rapid and curious glance round this sanctum; it was the first time he
had ever seen Mademoiselle d'Armilly, of whom he had heard much. "Well,"
said the banker to his daughter, "are we then all to be excluded?" He
then led the young man into the study, and either by chance or manœuvre
the door was partially closed after Andrea, so that from the place where
they sat neither the Count nor the baroness could see anything; but as
the banker had accompanied Andrea, Madame Danglars appeared to take no
notice of it.

The count soon heard Andrea's voice, singing a Corsican song,
accompanied by the piano. While the count smiled at hearing this song,
which made him lose sight of Andrea in the recollection of Benedetto,
Madame Danglars was boasting to Monte Cristo of her husband's strength
of mind, who that very morning had lost three or four hundred thousand
francs by a failure at Milan. The praise was well deserved, for had not
the count heard it from the baroness, or by one of those means by which
he knew everything, the baron's countenance would not have led him to
suspect it. "Hem," thought Monte Cristo, "he begins to conceal his
losses; a month since he boasted of them." Then aloud,--"Oh, madame, M.
Danglars is so skilful, he will soon regain at the Bourse what he loses
elsewhere."

"I see that you participate in a prevalent error," said Madame Danglars.
"What is it?" said Monte Cristo.

"That M. Danglars speculates, whereas he never does."

