"Very good," said the count.

"He said 'very good,'" muttered the major, "then--sir----" replied he.

"Then what?" asked Monte Cristo.

"Then the postscript----"

"Well; what of the postscript?"

"Then the postscript is as favorably received by you as the rest of the
letter?"

"Certainly; the Abbé Busoni and myself have a small account open between
us. I do not remember if it is exactly 48,000 francs, which I am still
owing him, but I dare say we shall not dispute the difference. You
attached great importance, then, to this postscript, my dear Monsieur
Cavalcanti?"

"I must explain to you," said the major, "that, fully confiding in the
signature of the Abbé Busoni, I had not provided myself with any other
funds; so that if this resource had failed me, I should have found
myself very unpleasantly situated in Paris."

"Is it possible that a man of your standing should be embarrassed
anywhere?" said Monte Cristo.

"Why, really I know no one," said the major.

"But then you yourself are known to others?"

"Yes, I am known, so that----"

"Proceed, my dear Monsieur Cavalcanti."

"So that you will remit to me these 48,000 francs?"

"Certainly, at your first request." The major's eyes dilated with
pleasing astonishment. "But sit down," said Monte Cristo; "really I do
not know what I have been thinking of--I have positively kept you
standing for the last quarter of an hour."

"Don't mention it." The major drew an armchair towards him, and
proceeded to seat himself.

"Now," said the count, "what will you take--a glass of sherry, port, or
Alicante?"

"Alicante, if you please; it is my favorite wine."

"I have some that is very good. You will take a biscuit with it, will
you not?"

"Yes, I will take a biscuit, as you are so obliging."

Monte Cristo rang; Baptistin appeared. The count advanced to meet him.

"Well?" said he in a low voice.

"The young man is here," said the valet de chambre in the same tone.

"Into what room did you take him?"

"Into the blue drawing-room, according to your excellency's orders."

"That's right; now bring the Alicante and some biscuits."

Baptistin left the room. "Really," said the major, "I am quite ashamed
of the trouble I am giving you."

"Pray don't mention such a thing," said the count. Baptistin re-entered
with glasses, wine, and biscuits. The count filled one glass, but in the
other he only poured a few drops of the ruby-colored liquid. The bottle
was covered with spiders' webs, and all the other signs which indicate
the age of wine more truly than do wrinkles on a man's face. The major
made a wise choice; he took the full glass and a biscuit. The count told
Baptistin to leave the plate within reach of his guest, who began by
sipping the Alicante with an expression of great satisfaction, and then
delicately steeped his biscuit in the wine.

"So, sir, you lived at Lucca, did you? You were rich, noble, held in
great esteem--had all that could render a man happy?"


"All," said the major, hastily swallowing his biscuit, "positively all."

"And yet there was one thing wanting in order to complete your
happiness?"

"Only one thing," said the Italian.

"And that one thing, your lost child."

"Ah," said the major, taking a second biscuit, "that consummation of my
happiness was indeed wanting." The worthy major raised his eyes to
heaven and sighed.

"Let me hear, then," said the count, "who this deeply regretted son was;
for I always understood you were a bachelor."

"That was the general opinion, sir," said the major, "and I----"

"Yes," replied the count, "and you confirmed the report. A youthful
indiscretion, I suppose, which you were anxious to conceal from the
world at large?" The major recovered himself, and resumed his usual calm
manner, at the same time casting his eyes down, either to give himself
time to compose his countenance, or to assist his imagination, all the
while giving an under-look at the count, the protracted smile on whose
lips still announced the same polite curiosity. "Yes," said the major,
"I did wish this fault to be hidden from every eye."

"Not on your own account, surely," replied Monte Cristo; "for a man is
above that sort of thing?"

"Oh, no, certainly not on my own account," said the major with a smile
and a shake of the head.

"But for the sake of the mother?" said the count.

"Yes, for the mother's sake--his poor mother!" cried the major, taking a
third biscuit.

"Take some more wine, my dear Cavalcanti," said the count, pouring out
for him a second glass of Alicante; "your emotion has quite overcome
you."

"His poor mother," murmured the major, trying to get the lachrymal gland
in operation, so as to moisten the corner of his eye with a false tear.

"She belonged to one of the first families in Italy, I think, did she
not?"

"She was of a noble family of Fiesole, count."

"And her name was----"

"Do you desire to know her name----?"

"Oh," said Monte Cristo "it would be quite superfluous for you to tell
me, for I already know it."

"The count knows everything," said the Italian, bowing.

"Oliva Corsinari, was it not?"

"Oliva Corsinari!"

"A marchioness?"

"A marchioness!"

"And you married her at last, notwithstanding the opposition of her
family?"

"Yes, that was the way it ended."

"And you have doubtless brought all your papers with you?" said Monte
Cristo.

"What papers?"

"The certificate of your marriage with Oliva Corsinari, and the register
of your child's birth."

"The register of my child's birth?"

"The register of the birth of Andrea Cavalcanti--of your son; is not his
name Andrea?"

"I believe so," said the major.

"What? You believe so?"

"I dare not positively assert it, as he has been lost for so long a
time."

"Well, then," said Monte Cristo "you have all the documents with you?"

"Your excellency, I regret to say that, not knowing it was necessary to
come provided with these papers, I neglected to bring them."

"That is unfortunate," returned Monte Cristo.

"Were they, then, so necessary?"

"They were indispensable."

The major passed his hand across his brow. "Ah, _perbacco_,
indispensable, were they?"

"Certainly they were; supposing there were to be doubts raised as to the
validity of your marriage or the legitimacy of your child?"

"True," said the major, "there might be doubts raised."

"In that case your son would be very unpleasantly situated."

"It would be fatal to his interests."

"It might cause him to fail in some desirable matrimonial alliance."
