"Why, it was won by a horse and rider utterly unknown on the course."

"Is that possible?"

"True as day. The fact was, nobody had observed a horse entered by the
name of Vampa, or that of a jockey styled Job, when, at the last moment,
a splendid roan, mounted by a jockey about as big as your fist,
presented themselves at the starting-post. They were obliged to stuff at
least twenty pounds weight of shot in the small rider's pockets, to make
him weight; but with all that he outstripped Ariel and Barbare, against
whom he ran, by at least three whole lengths."

"And was it not found out at last to whom the horse and jockey
belonged?"

"No."

"You say that the horse was entered under the name of Vampa?"

"Exactly; that was the title."

"Then," answered Albert, "I am better informed than you are, and know
who the owner of that horse was."

"Shut up, there!" cried the pit in chorus. And this time the tone and
manner in which the command was given, betokened such growing hostility
that the two young men perceived, for the first time, that the mandate
was addressed to them. Leisurely turning round, they calmly scrutinized
the various countenances around them, as though demanding someone person
who would take upon himself the responsibility of what they deemed
excessive impertinence; but as no one responded to the challenge, the
friends turned again to the front of the theatre, and affected to busy
themselves with the stage. At this moment the door of the minister's box
opened, and Madame Danglars, accompanied by her daughter, entered,
escorted by Lucien Debray, who assiduously conducted them to their
seats.

"Ha, ha," said Château-Renaud, "here come some friends of yours,
viscount! What are you looking at there? don't you see they are trying
to catch your eye?" Albert turned round, just in time to receive a
gracious wave of the fan from the baroness; as for Mademoiselle Eugénie,
she scarcely vouchsafed to waste the glances of her large black eyes
even upon the business of the stage. "I tell you what, my dear fellow,"
said Château-Renaud, "I cannot imagine what objection you can possibly
have to Mademoiselle Danglars--that is, setting aside her want of
ancestry and somewhat inferior rank, which by the way I don't think you
care very much about. Now, barring all that, I mean to say she is a
deuced fine girl!"

"Handsome, certainly," replied Albert, "but not to my taste, which I
confess, inclines to something softer, gentler, and more feminine."

"Ah, well," exclaimed Château-Renaud, who because he had seen his
thirtieth summer fancied himself duly warranted in assuming a sort of
paternal air with his more youthful friend, "you young people are never
satisfied; why, what would you have more? your parents have chosen you a
bride built on the model of Diana, the huntress, and yet you are not
content."

"No, for that very resemblance affrights me; I should have liked
something more in the manner of the Venus of Milo or Capua; but this
chase-loving Diana, continually surrounded by her nymphs, gives me a
sort of alarm lest she should some day bring on me the fate of Actæon."

And, indeed, it required but one glance at Mademoiselle Danglars to
comprehend the justness of Morcerf's remark--she was beautiful, but her
beauty was of too marked and decided a character to please a fastidious
taste; her hair was raven black, but its natural waves seemed somewhat
rebellious; her eyes, of the same color as her hair, were surmounted by
well-arched brows, whose great defect, however, consisted in an almost
habitual frown, while her whole physiognomy wore that expression of
firmness and decision so little in accordance with the gentler
attributes of her sex--her nose was precisely what a sculptor would have
chosen for a chiselled Juno. Her mouth, which might have been found
fault with as too large, displayed teeth of pearly whiteness, rendered
still more conspicuous by the brilliant carmine of her lips, contrasting
vividly with her naturally pale complexion. But that which completed the
almost masculine look Morcerf found so little to his taste, was a dark
mole, of much larger dimensions than these freaks of nature generally
are, placed just at the corner of her mouth; and the effect tended to
increase the expression of self-dependence that characterized her
countenance.

The rest of Mademoiselle Eugénie's person was in perfect keeping with
the head just described; she, indeed, reminded one of Diana, as Château-
Renaud observed, but her bearing was more haughty and resolute. As
regarded her attainments, the only fault to be found with them was the
same that a fastidious connoisseur might have found with her beauty,
that they were somewhat too erudite and masculine for so young a person.
She was a perfect linguist, a first-rate artist, wrote poetry, and
composed music; to the study of the latter she professed to be entirely
devoted, following it with an indefatigable perseverance, assisted by a
schoolfellow,--a young woman without fortune whose talent promised to
develop into remarkable powers as a singer. It was rumored that she was
an object of almost paternal interest to one of the principal composers
of the day, who excited her to spare no pains in the cultivation of her
voice, which might hereafter prove a source of wealth and independence.
But this counsel effectually decided Mademoiselle Danglars never to
commit herself by being seen in public with one destined for a
theatrical life; and acting upon this principle, the banker's daughter,
though perfectly willing to allow Mademoiselle Louise d'Armilly (that
was the name of the young virtuosa) to practice with her through the
day, took especial care not to be seen in her company. Still, though not
actually received at the Hôtel Danglars in the light of an acknowledged
friend, Louise was treated with far more kindness and consideration than
is usually bestowed on a governess.

The curtain fell almost immediately after the entrance of Madame
Danglars into her box, the band quitted the orchestra for the accustomed
half-hour's interval allowed between the acts, and the audience were
left at liberty to promenade the salon or lobbies, or to pay and receive
visits in their respective boxes. Morcerf and Château-Renaud were
amongst the first to avail themselves of this permission. For an instant
the idea struck Madame Danglars that this eagerness on the part of the
young viscount arose from his impatience to join her party, and she
whispered her expectations to her daughter, that Albert was hurrying to
pay his respects to them. Mademoiselle Eugénie, however, merely returned
a dissenting movement of the head, while, with a cold smile, she
directed the attention of her mother to an opposite box on the first
circle, in which sat the Countess G----, and where Morcerf had just made
his appearance. "So we meet again, my travelling friend, do we?" cried
the countess, extending her hand to him with all the warmth and
cordiality of an old acquaintance; "it was really very good of you to
recognize me so quickly, and still more so to bestow your first visit on
me."

"Be assured," replied Albert, "that if I had been aware of your arrival
in Paris, and had known your address, I should have paid my respects to
you before this. Allow me to introduce my friend, Baron de Château-
Renaud, one of the few true gentlemen now to be found in France, and
from whom I have just learned that you were a spectator of the races in
the Champ-de-Mars, yesterday." Château-Renaud bowed to the countess.


"So you were at the races, baron?" inquired the countess eagerly.

"Yes, madame."

"Well, then," pursued Madame G---- with considerable animation, "you can
probably tell me who won the Jockey Club stakes?"

"I am sorry to say I cannot," replied the baron; "and I was just asking
the same question of Albert."

"Are you very anxious to know, countess?" asked Albert.

"To know what?"

"The name of the owner of the winning horse?"

"Excessively; only imagine--but do tell me, viscount, whether you really
are acquainted with it or no?"

"I beg your pardon, madame, but you were about to relate some story,
were you not? You said, 'only imagine,'--and then paused. Pray
continue."

"Well, then, listen. You must know I felt so interested in the splendid
roan horse, with his elegant little rider, so tastefully dressed in a
pink satin jacket and cap, that I could not help praying for their
success with as much earnestness as though the half of my fortune were
at stake; and when I saw them outstrip all the others, and come to the
winning-post in such gallant style, I actually clapped my hands with
joy. Imagine my surprise, when, upon returning home, the first object I
met on the staircase was the identical jockey in the pink jacket! I
concluded that, by some singular chance, the owner of the winning horse
must live in the same hotel as myself; but, as I entered my apartments,
I beheld the very gold cup awarded as a prize to the unknown horse and
rider. Inside the cup was a small piece of paper, on which were written
these words--'From Lord Ruthven to Countess G----.'"

"Precisely; I was sure of it," said Morcerf.

"Sure of what?"

"That the owner of the horse was Lord Ruthven himself."

"What Lord Ruthven do you mean?"

"Why, our Lord Ruthven--the Vampire of the Salle Argentina!"

"Is it possible?" exclaimed the countess; "is he here in Paris?"

"To be sure,--why not?"

"And you visit him?--meet him at your own house and elsewhere?"

"I assure you he is my most intimate friend, and M. de Château-Renaud
has also the honor of his acquaintance."

"But why are you so sure of his being the winner of the Jockey Club
prize?"

"Was not the winning horse entered by the name of Vampa?"

"What of that?"

"Why, do you not recollect the name of the celebrated bandit by whom I
was made prisoner?"

