father's feet, were seated twenty Palikares, concealed from view by an
angle of the wall and watching with eager eyes the arrival of the boats.
They were armed with their long guns inlaid with mother-of-pearl and
silver, and cartridges in great numbers were lying scattered on the
floor. My father looked at his watch, and paced up and down with a
countenance expressive of the greatest anguish. This was the scene which
presented itself to my view as I quitted my father after that last kiss.
My mother and I traversed the gloomy passage leading to the cavern.
Selim was still at his post, and smiled sadly on us as we entered. We
fetched our cushions from the other end of the cavern, and sat down by
Selim. In great dangers the devoted ones cling to each other; and, young
as I was, I quite understood that some imminent danger was hanging over
our heads."

Albert had often heard--not from his father, for he never spoke on the
subject, but from strangers--the description of the last moments of the
vizier of Yanina; he had read different accounts of his death, but the
story seemed to acquire fresh meaning from the voice and expression of
the young girl, and her sympathetic accent and the melancholy expression
of her countenance at once charmed and horrified him. As to Haydée,
these terrible reminiscences seemed to have overpowered her for a
moment, for she ceased speaking, her head leaning on her hand like a
beautiful flower bowing beneath the violence of the storm; and her eyes
gazing on vacancy indicated that she was mentally contemplating the
green summit of the Pindus and the blue waters of the lake of Yanina,
which, like a magic mirror, seemed to reflect the sombre picture which
she sketched. Monte Cristo looked at her with an indescribable
expression of interest and pity.

"Go on," said the count in the Romaic language.


Haydée looked up abruptly, as if the sonorous tones of Monte Cristo's
voice had awakened her from a dream; and she resumed her narrative. "It
was about four o'clock in the afternoon, and although the day was
brilliant out-of-doors, we were enveloped in the gloomy darkness of the
cavern. One single, solitary light was burning there, and it appeared
like a star set in a heaven of blackness; it was Selim's flaming lance.
My mother was a Christian, and she prayed. Selim repeated from time to
time the sacred words: 'God is great!' However, my mother had still some
hope. As she was coming down, she thought she recognized the French
officer who had been sent to Constantinople, and in whom my father
placed so much confidence; for he knew that all the soldiers of the
French emperor were naturally noble and generous. She advanced some
steps towards the staircase, and listened. 'They are approaching,' said
she; 'perhaps they bring us peace and liberty!'--'What do you fear,
Vasiliki?' said Selim, in a voice at once so gentle and yet so proud.
'If they do not bring us peace, we will give them war; if they do not
bring life, we will give them death.' And he renewed the flame of his
lance with a gesture which made one think of Dionysus of old Crete. [*]
But I, being only a little child, was terrified by this undaunted
courage, which appeared to me both ferocious and senseless, and I
recoiled with horror from the idea of the frightful death amidst fire
and flames which probably awaited us.


* The god of fruitfulness in Grecian mythology. In Crete he was supposed
to be slain in winter with the decay of vegetation and to revive in the
spring. Haydée's learned reference is to the behavior of an actor in the
Dionysian festivals.--Ed.

"My mother experienced the same sensations, for I felt her tremble.
'Mamma, mamma,' said I, 'are we really to be killed?' And at the sound
of my voice the slaves redoubled their cries and prayers and
lamentations. 'My child,' said Vasiliki, 'may God preserve you from ever
wishing for that death which today you so much dread!' Then, whispering
to Selim, she asked what were her master's orders. 'If he send me his
poniard, it will signify that the emperor's intentions are not
favorable, and I am to set fire to the powder; if, on the contrary, he
send me his ring, it will be a sign that the emperor pardons him, and I
am to extinguish the match and leave the magazine untouched.'--'My
friend,' said my mother, 'when your master's orders arrive, if it is the
poniard which he sends, instead of despatching us by that horrible death
which we both so much dread, you will mercifully kill us with this same
poniard, will you not?'--'Yes, Vasiliki,' replied Selim tranquilly.

"Suddenly we heard loud cries; and, listening, discerned that they were
cries of joy. The name of the French officer who had been sent to
Constantinople resounded on all sides amongst our Palikares; it was
evident that he brought the answer of the emperor, and that it was
favorable."

"And do you not remember the Frenchman's name?" said Morcerf, quite
ready to aid the memory of the narrator. Monte Cristo made a sign to him
to be silent.

"I do not recollect it," said Haydée.

"The noise increased; steps were heard approaching nearer and nearer;
they were descending the steps leading to the cavern. Selim made ready
his lance. Soon a figure appeared in the gray twilight at the entrance
of the cave, formed by the reflection of the few rays of daylight which
had found their way into this gloomy retreat. 'Who are you?' cried
Selim. 'But whoever you may be, I charge you not to advance another
step.'--'Long live the emperor!' said the figure. 'He grants a full
pardon to the Vizier Ali, and not only gives him his life, but restores
to him his fortune and his possessions.' My mother uttered a cry of joy,
and clasped me to her bosom. 'Stop,' said Selim, seeing that she was
about to go out; 'you see I have not yet received the ring,'--'True,'
said my mother. And she fell on her knees, at the same time holding me
up towards heaven, as if she desired, while praying to God in my behalf,
to raise me actually to his presence."

And for the second time Haydée stopped, overcome by such violent emotion
that the perspiration stood upon her pale brow, and her stifled voice
seemed hardly able to find utterance, so parched and dry were her throat
and lips. Monte Cristo poured a little iced water into a glass, and
presented it to her, saying with a mildness in which was also a shade of
command,--"Courage."


Haydée dried her eyes, and continued: "By this time our eyes, habituated
to the darkness, had recognized the messenger of the pasha,--it was a
friend. Selim had also recognized him, but the brave young man only
acknowledged one duty, which was to obey. 'In whose name do you come?'
said he to him. 'I come in the name of our master, Ali Tepelini.'--'If
you come from Ali himself,' said Selim, 'you know what you were charged
to remit to me?'--'Yes,' said the messenger, 'and I bring you his ring.'
At these words he raised his hand above his head, to show the token; but
it was too far off, and there was not light enough to enable Selim,
where he was standing, to distinguish and recognize the object presented
to his view. 'I do not see what you have in your hand,' said Selim.
'Approach then,' said the messenger, 'or I will come nearer to you, if
you prefer it.'--'I will agree to neither one nor the other,' replied
the young soldier; 'place the object which I desire to see in the ray of
light which shines there, and retire while I examine it.'--'Be it so,'
said the envoy; and he retired, after having first deposited the token
agreed on in the place pointed out to him by Selim.

"Oh, how our hearts palpitated; for it did, indeed, seem to be a ring
which was placed there. But was it my father's ring? that was the
question. Selim, still holding in his hand the lighted match, walked
towards the opening in the cavern, and, aided by the faint light which
streamed in through the mouth of the cave, picked up the token.

"'It is well,' said he, kissing it; 'it is my master's ring!' And
throwing the match on the ground, he trampled on it and extinguished it.
The messenger uttered a cry of joy and clapped his hands. At this signal
four soldiers of the Seraskier Koorshid suddenly appeared, and Selim
fell, pierced by five blows. Each man had stabbéd him separately, and,
intoxicated by their crime, though still pale with fear, they sought all
over the cavern to discover if there was any fear of fire, after which
they amused themselves by rolling on the bags of gold. At this moment my
mother seized me in her arms, and hurrying noiselessly along numerous
turnings and windings known only to ourselves, she arrived at a private
staircase of the kiosk, where was a scene of frightful tumult and
confusion. The lower rooms were entirely filled with Koorshid's troops;
that is to say, with our enemies. Just as my mother was on the point of
pushing open a small door, we heard the voice of the pasha sounding in a
loud and threatening tone. My mother applied her eye to the crack
between the boards; I luckily found a small opening which afforded me a
view of the apartment and what was passing within. 'What do you want?'
said my father to some people who were holding a paper inscribed with
characters of gold. 'What we want,' replied one, 'is to communicate to
you the will of his highness. Do you see this firman?'--'I do,' said my
father. 'Well, read it; he demands your head.'


"My father answered with a loud laugh, which was more frightful than
even threats would have been, and he had not ceased when two reports of
a pistol were heard; he had fired them himself, and had killed two men.
The Palikares, who were prostrated at my father's feet, now sprang up
and fired, and the room was filled with fire and smoke. At the same
instant the firing began on the other side, and the balls penetrated the
boards all round us. Oh, how noble did the grand vizier my father look
at that moment, in the midst of the flying bullets, his scimitar in his
hand, and his face blackened with the powder of his enemies! and how he
terrified them, even then, and made them fly before him! 'Selim, Selim!'
cried he, 'guardian of the fire, do your duty!'--'Selim is dead,'
replied a voice which seemed to come from the depths of the earth, 'and
you are lost, Ali!' At the same moment an explosion was heard, and the
flooring of the room in which my father was sitting was suddenly torn up
and shivered to atoms--the troops were firing from underneath. Three or
four Palikares fell with their bodies literally ploughed with wounds.

"My father howled aloud, plunged his fingers into the holes which the
balls had made, and tore up one of the planks entire. But immediately
through this opening twenty more shots were fired, and the flame,
rushing up like fire from the crater of a volcano, soon reached the
tapestry, which it quickly devoured. In the midst of all this frightful
tumult and these terrific cries, two reports, fearfully distinct,
followed by two shrieks more heartrending than all, froze me with
terror. These two shots had mortally wounded my father, and it was he
who had given utterance to these frightful cries. However, he remained
standing, clinging to a window. My mother tried to force the door, that
she might go and die with him, but it was fastened on the inside. All
around him were lying the Palikares, writhing in convulsive agonies,
while two or three who were only slightly wounded were trying to escape
by springing from the windows. At this crisis the whole flooring
suddenly gave way, my father fell on one knee, and at the same moment
twenty hands were thrust forth, armed with sabres, pistols, and
poniards--twenty blows were instantaneously directed against one man,
and my father disappeared in a whirlwind of fire and smoke kindled by
these demons, and which seemed like hell itself opening beneath his
feet. I felt myself fall to the ground, my mother had fainted."

Haydée's arms fell by her side, and she uttered a deep groan, at the
same time looking towards the count as if to ask if he were satisfied
with her obedience to his commands. Monte Cristo arose and approached
her, took her hand, and said to her in Romaic, "Calm yourself, my dear
