eyes sparkled, and the good doctor understood that he wished to behold
his child. He therefore approached the bed, and while his companion was
dipping the fingers with which he had touched the lips of the corpse in
chloride of lime, he uncovered the calm and pale face, which looked like
that of a sleeping angel. A tear, which appeared in the old man's eye,
expressed his thanks to the doctor. The doctor of the dead then laid his
permit on the corner of the table, and having fulfilled his duty, was
conducted out by d'Avrigny. Villefort met them at the door of his study;
having in a few words thanked the district doctor, he turned to
d'Avrigny, and said,--"And now the priest."

"Is there any particular priest you wish to pray with Valentine?" asked
d'Avrigny.

"No." said Villefort; "fetch the nearest."

"The nearest," said the district doctor, "is a good Italian abbé, who
lives next door to you. Shall I call on him as I pass?"

"D'Avrigny," said Villefort, "be so kind, I beseech you, as to accompany
this gentleman. Here is the key of the door, so that you can go in and
out as you please; you will bring the priest with you, and will oblige
me by introducing him into my child's room."


"Do you wish to see him?"

"I only wish to be alone. You will excuse me, will you not? A priest can
understand a father's grief." And M. de Villefort, giving the key to
d'Avrigny, again bade farewell to the strange doctor, and retired to his
study, where he began to work. For some temperaments work is a remedy
for all afflictions. As the doctors entered the street, they saw a man
in a cassock standing on the threshold of the next door. "This is the
abbé of whom I spoke," said the doctor to d'Avrigny. D'Avrigny accosted
the priest. "Sir," he said, "are you disposed to confer a great
obligation on an unhappy father who has just lost his daughter? I mean
M. de Villefort, the king's attorney."

"Ah," said the priest, in a marked Italian accent; "yes, I have heard
that death is in that house."

"Then I need not tell you what kind of service he requires of you."

"I was about to offer myself, sir," said the priest; "it is our mission
to forestall our duties."

"It is a young girl."

"I know it, sir; the servants who fled from the house informed me. I
also know that her name is Valentine, and I have already prayed for
her."

"Thank you, sir," said d'Avrigny; "since you have commenced your sacred
office, deign to continue it. Come and watch by the dead, and all the
wretched family will be grateful to you."

"I am going, sir; and I do not hesitate to say that no prayers will be
more fervent than mine." D'Avrigny took the priest's hand, and without
meeting Villefort, who was engaged in his study, they reached
Valentine's room, which on the following night was to be occupied by the
undertakers. On entering the room, Noirtier's eyes met those of the
abbé, and no doubt he read some particular expression in them, for he
remained in the room. D'Avrigny recommended the attention of the priest
to the living as well as to the dead, and the abbé promised to devote
his prayers to Valentine and his attentions to Noirtier. In order,
doubtless, that he might not be disturbed while fulfilling his sacred
mission, the priest rose as soon as d'Avrigny departed, and not only
bolted the door through which the doctor had just left, but also that
leading to Madame de Villefort's room.



Chapter 104. Danglars' Signature

The next morning dawned dull and cloudy. During the night the
undertakers had executed their melancholy office, and wrapped the corpse
in the winding-sheet, which, whatever may be said about the equality of
death, is at least a last proof of the luxury so pleasing in life. This
winding-sheet was nothing more than a beautiful piece of cambric, which
the young girl had bought a fortnight before. During the evening two
men, engaged for the purpose, had carried Noirtier from Valentine's room
into his own, and contrary to all expectation there was no difficulty in
withdrawing him from his child. The Abbé Busoni had watched till
daylight, and then left without calling anyone. D'Avrigny returned about
eight o'clock in the morning; he met Villefort on his way to Noirtier's
room, and accompanied him to see how the old man had slept. They found
him in the large armchair, which served him for a bed, enjoying a calm,
nay, almost a smiling sleep. They both stood in amazement at the door.

"See," said d'Avrigny to Villefort, "nature knows how to alleviate the
deepest sorrow. No one can say that M. Noirtier did not love his child,
and yet he sleeps."

"Yes, you are right," replied Villefort, surprised; "he sleeps, indeed!
And this is the more strange, since the least contradiction keeps him
awake all night."

"Grief has stunned him," replied d'Avrigny; and they both returned
thoughtfully to the procureur's study.

"See, I have not slept," said Villefort, showing his undisturbed bed;
"grief does not stun me. I have not been in bed for two nights; but then
look at my desk; see what I have written during these two days and
nights. I have filled those papers, and have made out the accusation
against the assassin Benedetto. Oh, work, work,--my passion, my joy, my
delight,--it is for thee to alleviate my sorrows!" and he convulsively
grasped the hand of d'Avrigny.

"Do you require my services now?" asked d'Avrigny.

"No," said Villefort; "only return again at eleven o'clock; at twelve
the--the--oh, heavens, my poor, poor child!" and the procureur again
becoming a man, lifted up his eyes and groaned.

"Shall you be present in the reception room?"

"No; I have a cousin who has undertaken this sad office. I shall work,
doctor--when I work I forget everything." And, indeed, no sooner had the
doctor left the room, than he was again absorbed in study. On the
doorsteps d'Avrigny met the cousin whom Villefort had mentioned, a
personage as insignificant in our story as in the world he occupied--one
of those beings designed from their birth to make themselves useful to
others. He was punctual, dressed in black, with crape around his hat,
and presented himself at his cousin's with a face made up for the
occasion, and which he could alter as might be required. At twelve
o'clock the mourning-coaches rolled into the paved court, and the Rue du
Faubourg Saint-Honoré was filled with a crowd of idlers, equally pleased
to witness the festivities or the mourning of the rich, and who rush
with the same avidity to a funeral procession as to the marriage of a
duchess.

Gradually the reception-room filled, and some of our old friends made
their appearance--we mean Debray, Château-Renaud, and Beauchamp,
accompanied by all the leading men of the day at the bar, in literature,
or the army, for M. de Villefort moved in the first Parisian circles,
less owing to his social position than to his personal merit. The cousin
standing at the door ushered in the guests, and it was rather a relief
to the indifferent to see a person as unmoved as themselves, and who did
not exact a mournful face or force tears, as would have been the case
with a father, a brother, or a lover. Those who were acquainted soon
formed into little groups. One of them was made of Debray, Château-
Renaud, and Beauchamp.

"Poor girl," said Debray, like the rest, paying an involuntary tribute
to the sad event,--"poor girl, so young, so rich, so beautiful! Could
you have imagined this scene, Château-Renaud, when we saw her, at the
most three weeks ago, about to sign that contract?"

"Indeed, no," said Château-Renaud--"Did you know her?"

"I spoke to her once or twice at Madame de Morcerf's, among the rest;
she appeared to me charming, though rather melancholy. Where is her
stepmother? Do you know?"

"She is spending the day with the wife of the worthy gentleman who is
receiving us."


"Who is he?"

"Whom do you mean?"

"The gentleman who receives us? Is he a deputy?"

"Oh, no. I am condemned to witness those gentlemen every day," said
Beauchamp; "but he is perfectly unknown to me."

"Have you mentioned this death in your paper?"

"It has been mentioned, but the article is not mine; indeed, I doubt if
it will please M. Villefort, for it says that if four successive deaths
had happened anywhere else than in the house of the king's attorney, he
would have interested himself somewhat more about it."

"Still," said Château-Renaud, "Dr. d'Avrigny, who attends my mother,
declares he is in despair about it. But whom are you seeking, Debray?"

"I am seeking the Count of Monte Cristo" said the young man.

"I met him on the boulevard, on my way here," said Beauchamp. "I think
he is about to leave Paris; he was going to his banker."

"His banker? Danglars is his banker, is he not?" asked Château-Renaud of
Debray.

"I believe so," replied the secretary with slight uneasiness. "But Monte
Cristo is not the only one I miss here; I do not see Morrel."

"Morrel? Do they know him?" asked Château-Renaud. "I think he has only
been introduced to Madame de Villefort."

"Still, he ought to have been here," said Debray; "I wonder what will be
talked about tonight; this funeral is the news of the day. But hush,
here comes our minister of justice; he will feel obliged to make some
little speech to the cousin," and the three young men drew near to
listen. Beauchamp told the truth when he said that on his way to the
funeral he had met Monte Cristo, who was directing his steps towards the
Rue de la Chaussée d'Antin, to M. Danglars'.

The banker saw the carriage of the count enter the courtyard, and
