"Are you then come from M. de Morcerf's?" asked Monte Cristo.

"No," said Morrel; "is someone dead in his house?"

"The general has just blown his brains out," replied Monte Cristo with
great coolness.

"Oh, what a dreadful event!" cried Maximilian.

"Not for the countess, or for Albert," said Monte Cristo; "a dead father
or husband is better than a dishonored one,--blood washes out shame."

"Poor countess," said Maximilian, "I pity her very much; she is so noble
a woman!"

"Pity Albert also, Maximilian; for believe me he is the worthy son of
the countess. But let us return to yourself. You have hastened to me--
can I have the happiness of being useful to you?"

"Yes, I need your help: that is I thought like a madman that you could
lend me your assistance in a case where God alone can succor me."


"Tell me what it is," replied Monte Cristo.

"Oh," said Morrel, "I know not, indeed, if I may reveal this secret to
mortal ears, but fatality impels me, necessity constrains me, count----"
Morrel hesitated.

"Do you think I love you?" said Monte Cristo, taking the young man's
hand affectionately in his.

"Oh, you encourage me, and something tells me there," placing his hand
on his heart, "that I ought to have no secret from you."

"You are right, Morrel; God is speaking to your heart, and your heart
speaks to you. Tell me what it says."

"Count, will you allow me to send Baptistin to inquire after someone you
know?"

"I am at your service, and still more my servants."

"Oh, I cannot live if she is not better."

"Shall I ring for Baptistin?"

"No, I will go and speak to him myself." Morrel went out, called
Baptistin, and whispered a few words to him. The valet ran directly.

"Well, have you sent?" asked Monte Cristo, seeing Morrel return.

"Yes, and now I shall be more calm."

"You know I am waiting," said Monte Cristo, smiling.

"Yes, and I will tell you. One evening I was in a garden; a clump of
trees concealed me; no one suspected I was there. Two persons passed
near me--allow me to conceal their names for the present; they were
speaking in an undertone, and yet I was so interested in what they said
that I did not lose a single word."

"This is a gloomy introduction, if I may judge from your pallor and
shuddering, Morrel."

"Oh, yes, very gloomy, my friend. Someone had just died in the house to
which that garden belonged. One of the persons whose conversation I
overheard was the master of the house; the other, the physician. The
former was confiding to the latter his grief and fear, for it was the
second time within a month that death had suddenly and unexpectedly
entered that house which was apparently destined to destruction by some
exterminating angel, as an object of God's anger."

"Ah, indeed?" said Monte Cristo, looking earnestly at the young man, and
by an imperceptible movement turning his chair, so that he remained in
the shade while the light fell full on Maximilian's face. "Yes,"
continued Morrel, "death had entered that house twice within one month."

"And what did the doctor answer?" asked Monte Cristo.

"He replied--he replied, that the death was not a natural one, and must
be attributed"--

"To what?"

"To poison."

"Indeed!" said Monte Cristo with a slight cough which in moments of
extreme emotion helped him to disguise a blush, or his pallor, or the
intense interest with which he listened; "indeed, Maximilian, did you
hear that?"

"Yes, my dear count, I heard it; and the doctor added that if another
death occurred in a similar way he must appeal to justice." Monte Cristo
listened, or appeared to do so, with the greatest calmness. "Well," said
Maximilian, "death came a third time, and neither the master of the
house nor the doctor said a word. Death is now, perhaps, striking a
fourth blow. Count, what am I bound to do, being in possession of this
secret?"

"My dear friend," said Monte Cristo, "you appear to be relating an
adventure which we all know by heart. I know the house where you heard
it, or one very similar to it; a house with a garden, a master, a
physician, and where there have been three unexpected and sudden deaths.
Well, I have not intercepted your confidence, and yet I know all that as
well as you, and I have no conscientious scruples. No, it does not
concern me. You say an exterminating angel appears to have devoted that
house to God's anger--well, who says your supposition is not reality? Do
not notice things which those whose interest it is to see them pass
over. If it is God's justice, instead of his anger, which is walking
through that house, Maximilian, turn away your face and let his justice
accomplish its purpose." Morrel shuddered. There was something mournful,
solemn, and terrible in the count's manner. "Besides," continued he, in
so changed a tone that no one would have supposed it was the same person
speaking--"besides, who says that it will begin again?"

"It has returned, count," exclaimed Morrel; "that is why I hastened to
you."

"Well, what do you wish me to do? Do you wish me, for instance, to give
information to the procureur?" Monte Cristo uttered the last words with
so much meaning that Morrel, starting up, cried out, "You know of whom I
speak, count, do you not?"

"Perfectly well, my good friend; and I will prove it to you by putting
the dots to the _i_, or rather by naming the persons. You were walking
one evening in M. de Villefort's garden; from what you relate, I suppose
it to have been the evening of Madame de Saint-Méran's death. You heard
M. de Villefort talking to M. d'Avrigny about the death of M. de Saint-
Méran, and that no less surprising, of the countess. M. d'Avrigny said
he believed they both proceeded from poison; and you, honest man, have
ever since been asking your heart and sounding your conscience to know
if you ought to expose or conceal this secret. We are no longer in the
Middle Ages; there is no longer a Vehmgericht, or Free Tribunals; what
do you want to ask these people? 'Conscience, what hast thou to do with
me?' as Sterne said. My dear fellow, let them sleep on, if they are
asleep; let them grow pale in their drowsiness, if they are disposed to
do so, and pray do you remain in peace, who have no remorse to disturb
you."

Deep grief was depicted on Morrel's features; he seized Monte Cristo's
hand. "But it is beginning again, I say!"

"Well," said the Count, astonished at his perseverance, which he could
not understand, and looking still more earnestly at Maximilian, "let it
begin again,--it is like the house of the Atreidae; [*] God has
condemned them, and they must submit to their punishment. They will all
disappear, like the fabrics children build with cards, and which fall,
one by one, under the breath of their builder, even if there are two
hundred of them. Three months since it was M. de Saint-Méran; Madame de
Saint-Méran two months since; the other day it was Barrois; today, the
old Noirtier, or young Valentine."


* In the old Greek legend the Atreidae, or children of Atreus, were
doomed to punishment because of the abominable crime of their father.
The _Agamemnon_ of Aeschylus is based on this legend.

"You knew it?" cried Morrel, in such a paroxysm of terror that Monte
Cristo started,--he whom the falling heavens would have found unmoved;
"you knew it, and said nothing?"

"And what is it to me?" replied Monte Cristo, shrugging his shoulders;
"do I know those people? and must I lose the one to save the other?
Faith, no, for between the culprit and the victim I have no choice."

"But I," cried Morrel, groaning with sorrow, "I love her!"

"You love?--whom?" cried Monte Cristo, starting to his feet, and seizing
the two hands which Morrel was raising towards heaven.

"I love most fondly--I love madly--I love as a man who would give his
life-blood to spare her a tear--I love Valentine de Villefort, who is
being murdered at this moment! Do you understand me? I love her; and I
ask God and you how I can save her?" Monte Cristo uttered a cry which
those only can conceive who have heard the roar of a wounded lion.
"Unhappy man," cried he, wringing his hands in his turn; "you love
Valentine,--that daughter of an accursed race!" Never had Morrel
witnessed such an expression--never had so terrible an eye flashed
before his face--never had the genius of terror he had so often seen,
either on the battle-field or in the murderous nights of Algeria, shaken
around him more dreadful fire. He drew back terrified.

As for Monte Cristo, after this ebullition he closed his eyes as if
dazzled by internal light. In a moment he restrained himself so
powerfully that the tempestuous heaving of his breast subsided, as
turbulent and foaming waves yield to the sun's genial influence when the
cloud has passed. This silence, self-control, and struggle lasted about
twenty seconds, then the count raised his pallid face. "See," said he,
"my dear friend, how God punishes the most thoughtless and unfeeling men
for their indifference, by presenting dreadful scenes to their view. I,
who was looking on, an eager and curious spectator,--I, who was watching
the working of this mournful tragedy,--I, who like a wicked angel was
laughing at the evil men committed protected by secrecy (a secret is
easily kept by the rich and powerful), I am in my turn bitten by the
serpent whose tortuous course I was watching, and bitten to the heart!"

Morrel groaned. "Come, come," continued the count, "complaints are
unavailing, be a man, be strong, be full of hope, for I am here and will
watch over you." Morrel shook his head sorrowfully. "I tell you to hope.
