day the occupants of the apartments on the fifth floor of the house, now
become the property of Dantès, were duly informed by the notary who had
arranged the necessary transfer of deeds, etc., that the new landlord
gave them their choice of any of the rooms in the house, without the
least augmentation of rent, upon condition of their giving instant
possession of the two small chambers they at present inhabited.

This strange event aroused great wonder and curiosity in the
neighborhood of the Allées de Meillan, and a multitude of theories were
afloat, none of which was anywhere near the truth. But what raised
public astonishment to a climax, and set all conjecture at defiance, was
the knowledge that the same stranger who had in the morning visited the
Allées de Meillan had been seen in the evening walking in the little
village of the Catalans, and afterwards observed to enter a poor
fisherman's hut, and to pass more than an hour in inquiring after
persons who had either been dead or gone away for more than fifteen or
sixteen years. But on the following day the family from whom all these
particulars had been asked received a handsome present, consisting of an
entirely new fishing-boat, with two seines and a tender. The delighted
recipients of these munificent gifts would gladly have poured out their
thanks to their generous benefactor, but they had seen him, upon
quitting the hut, merely give some orders to a sailor, and then
springing lightly on horseback, leave Marseilles by the Porte d'Aix.



Chapter 26. The Pont du Gard Inn

Such of my readers as have made a pedestrian excursion to the south of
France may perchance have noticed, about midway between the town of
Beaucaire and the village of Bellegarde,--a little nearer to the former
than to the latter,--a small roadside inn, from the front of which hung,
creaking and flapping in the wind, a sheet of tin covered with a
grotesque representation of the Pont du Gard. This modern place of
entertainment stood on the left-hand side of the post road, and backed
upon the Rhône. It also boasted of what in Languedoc is styled a garden,
consisting of a small plot of ground, on the side opposite to the main
entrance reserved for the reception of guests. A few dingy olives and
stunted fig-trees struggled hard for existence, but their withered dusty
foliage abundantly proved how unequal was the conflict. Between these
sickly shrubs grew a scanty supply of garlic, tomatoes, and eschalots;
while, lone and solitary, like a forgotten sentinel, a tall pine raised
its melancholy head in one of the corners of this unattractive spot, and
displayed its flexible stem and fan-shaped summit dried and cracked by
the fierce heat of the sub-tropical sun.

In the surrounding plain, which more resembled a dusty lake than solid
ground, were scattered a few miserable stalks of wheat, the effect, no
doubt, of a curious desire on the part of the agriculturists of the
country to see whether such a thing as the raising of grain in those
parched regions was practicable. Each stalk served as a perch for a
grasshopper, which regaled the passers-by through this Egyptian scene
with its strident, monotonous note.

For about seven or eight years the little tavern had been kept by a man
and his wife, with two servants,--a chambermaid named Trinette, and a
hostler called Pecaud. This small staff was quite equal to all the
requirements, for a canal between Beaucaire and Aiguemortes had
revolutionized transportation by substituting boats for the cart and the
stagecoach. And, as though to add to the daily misery which this
prosperous canal inflicted on the unfortunate innkeeper, whose utter
ruin it was fast accomplishing, it was situated between the Rhône from
which it had its source and the post-road it had depleted, not a hundred
steps from the inn, of which we have given a brief but faithful
description.

The innkeeper himself was a man of from forty to fifty-five years of
age, tall, strong, and bony, a perfect specimen of the natives of those
southern latitudes; he had dark, sparkling, and deep-set eyes, hooked
nose, and teeth white as those of a carnivorous animal; his hair, like
his beard, which he wore under his chin, was thick and curly, and in
spite of his age but slightly interspersed with a few silvery threads.
His naturally dark complexion had assumed a still further shade of brown
from the habit the unfortunate man had acquired of stationing himself
from morning till eve at the threshold of his door, on the lookout for
guests who seldom came, yet there he stood, day after day, exposed to
the meridional rays of a burning sun, with no other protection for his
head than a red handkerchief twisted around it, after the manner of the
Spanish muleteers. This man was our old acquaintance, Gaspard
Caderousse.

His wife, on the contrary, whose maiden name had been Madeleine Radelle,
was pale, meagre, and sickly-looking. Born in the neighborhood of Arles,
she had shared in the beauty for which its women are proverbial; but
that beauty had gradually withered beneath the devastating influence of
the slow fever so prevalent among dwellers by the ponds of Aiguemortes
and the marshes of Camargue. She remained nearly always in her second-
floor chamber, shivering in her chair, or stretched languid and feeble
on her bed, while her husband kept his daily watch at the door--a duty
he performed with so much the greater willingness, as it saved him the
necessity of listening to the endless plaints and murmurs of his
helpmate, who never saw him without breaking out into bitter invectives
against fate; to all of which her husband would calmly return an
unvarying reply, in these philosophic words:--

"Hush, La Carconte. It is God's pleasure that things should be so."

The sobriquet of La Carconte had been bestowed on Madeleine Radelle from
the fact that she had been born in a village, so called, situated
between Salon and Lambesc; and as a custom existed among the inhabitants
of that part of France where Caderousse lived of styling every person by
some particular and distinctive appellation, her husband had bestowed on
her the name of La Carconte in place of her sweet and euphonious name of
Madeleine, which, in all probability, his rude gutteral language would
not have enabled him to pronounce. Still, let it not be supposed that
amid this affected resignation to the will of Providence, the
unfortunate innkeeper did not writhe under the double misery of seeing
the hateful canal carry off his customers and his profits, and the daily
infliction of his peevish partner's murmurs and lamentations.


Like other dwellers in the south, he was a man of sober habits and
moderate desires, but fond of external show, vain, and addicted to
display. During the days of his prosperity, not a festivity took place
without himself and wife being among the spectators. He dressed in the
picturesque costume worn upon grand occasions by the inhabitants of the
south of France, bearing equal resemblance to the style adopted both by
the Catalans and Andalusians; while La Carconte displayed the charming
fashion prevalent among the women of Arles, a mode of attire borrowed
equally from Greece and Arabia. But, by degrees, watch-chains,
necklaces, parti-colored scarves, embroidered bodices, velvet vests,
elegantly worked stockings, striped gaiters, and silver buckles for the
shoes, all disappeared; and Gaspard Caderousse, unable to appear abroad
in his pristine splendor, had given up any further participation in the
pomps and vanities, both for himself and wife, although a bitter feeling
of envious discontent filled his mind as the sound of mirth and merry
music from the joyous revellers reached even the miserable hostelry to
which he still clung, more for the shelter than the profit it afforded.

Caderousse, then, was, as usual, at his place of observation before the
door, his eyes glancing listlessly from a piece of closely shaven grass-
-on which some fowls were industriously, though fruitlessly, endeavoring
to turn up some grain or insect suited to their palate--to the deserted
road, which led away to the north and south, when he was aroused by the
shrill voice of his wife, and grumbling to himself as he went, he
mounted to her chamber, first taking care, however, to set the entrance
door wide open, as an invitation to any chance traveller who might be
passing.

At the moment Caderousse quitted his sentry-like watch before the door,
the road on which he so eagerly strained his sight was void and lonely
as a desert at midday. There it lay stretching out into one interminable
line of dust and sand, with its sides bordered by tall, meagre trees,
altogether presenting so uninviting an appearance, that no one in his
senses could have imagined that any traveller, at liberty to regulate
his hours for journeying, would choose to expose himself in such a
formidable Sahara. Nevertheless, had Caderousse but retained his post a
few minutes longer, he might have caught a dim outline of something
approaching from the direction of Bellegarde; as the moving object drew
nearer, he would easily have perceived that it consisted of a man and
horse, between whom the kindest and most amiable understanding appeared
to exist. The horse was of Hungarian breed, and ambled along at an easy
pace. His rider was a priest, dressed in black, and wearing a three-
cornered hat; and, spite of the ardent rays of a noonday sun, the pair
came on with a fair degree of rapidity.

Having arrived before the Pont du Gard, the horse stopped, but whether
for his own pleasure or that of his rider would have been difficult to
say. However that might have been, the priest, dismounting, led his
steed by the bridle in search of some place to which he could secure
him. Availing himself of a handle that projected from a half-fallen
door, he tied the animal safely and having drawn a red cotton
handkerchief, from his pocket, wiped away the perspiration that streamed
from his brow, then, advancing to the door, struck thrice with the end
of his iron-shod stick. At this unusual sound, a huge black dog came
rushing to meet the daring assailant of his ordinarily tranquil abode,
snarling and displaying his sharp white teeth with a determined
hostility that abundantly proved how little he was accustomed to
society. At that moment a heavy footstep was heard descending the wooden
staircase that led from the upper floor, and, with many bows and
courteous smiles, the host of the Pont du Gard besought his guest to
enter.


"You are welcome, sir, most welcome!" repeated the astonished
Caderousse. "Now, then, Margotin," cried he, speaking to the dog, "will
you be quiet? Pray don't heed him, sir!--he only barks, he never bites.
I make no doubt a glass of good wine would be acceptable this dreadfully
hot day." Then perceiving for the first time the garb of the traveller
he had to entertain, Caderousse hastily exclaimed: "A thousand pardons!
I really did not observe whom I had the honor to receive under my poor
roof. What would the abbé please to have? What refreshment can I offer?
All I have is at his service."

The priest gazed on the person addressing him with a long and searching
gaze--there even seemed a disposition on his part to court a similar
scrutiny on the part of the innkeeper; then, observing in the
countenance of the latter no other expression than extreme surprise at
his own want of attention to an inquiry so courteously worded, he deemed
it as well to terminate this dumb show, and therefore said, speaking
with a strong Italian accent, "You are, I presume, M. Caderousse?"

"Yes, sir," answered the host, even more surprised at the question than
he had been by the silence which had preceded it; "I am Gaspard
Caderousse, at your service."

"Gaspard Caderousse," rejoined the priest. "Yes,--Christian and surname
are the same. You formerly lived, I believe in the Allées de Meillan, on
the fourth floor?"

