"'Danglars.'"

"He!" cried Albert; "yes, it is indeed he who has so long pursued my
father with jealous hatred. He, the man who would be popular, cannot
forgive the Count of Morcerf for being created a peer; and this marriage
broken off without a reason being assigned--yes, it is all from the same
cause."

"Make inquiries, Albert, but do not be angry without reason; make
inquiries, and if it be true----"

"Oh, yes, if it be true," cried the young man, "he shall pay me all I
have suffered."

"Beware, Morcerf, he is already an old man."

"I will respect his age as he has respected the honor of my family; if
my father had offended him, why did he not attack him personally? Oh,
no, he was afraid to encounter him face to face."

"I do not condemn you, Albert; I only restrain you. Act prudently."

"Oh, do not fear; besides, you will accompany me. Beauchamp, solemn
transactions should be sanctioned by a witness. Before this day closes,
if M. Danglars is guilty, he shall cease to live, or I shall die.
_Pardieu_, Beauchamp, mine shall be a splendid funeral!"

"When such resolutions are made, Albert, they should be promptly
executed. Do you wish to go to M. Danglars? Let us go immediately." They
sent for a cabriolet. On entering the banker's mansion, they perceived
the phaeton and servant of M. Andrea Cavalcanti.

"Ah! _parbleu!_ that's good," said Albert, with a gloomy tone. "If M.
Danglars will not fight with me, I will kill his son-in-law; Cavalcanti
will certainly fight." The servant announced the young man; but the
banker, recollecting what had transpired the day before, did not wish
him admitted. It was, however, too late; Albert had followed the
footman, and, hearing the order given, forced the door open, and
followed by Beauchamp found himself in the banker's study. "Sir," cried
the latter, "am I no longer at liberty to receive whom I choose in my
house? You appear to forget yourself sadly."

"No, sir," said Albert, coldly; "there are circumstances in which one
cannot, except through cowardice,--I offer you that refuge,--refuse to
admit certain persons at least."

"What is your errand, then, with me, sir?"

"I mean," said Albert, drawing near, and without apparently noticing
Cavalcanti, who stood with his back towards the fireplace--"I mean to
propose a meeting in some retired corner where no one will interrupt us
for ten minutes; that will be sufficient--where two men having met, one
of them will remain on the ground." Danglars turned pale; Cavalcanti
moved a step forward, and Albert turned towards him. "And you, too,"
said he, "come, if you like, monsieur; you have a claim, being almost
one of the family, and I will give as many rendezvous of that kind as I
can find persons willing to accept them." Cavalcanti looked at Danglars
with a stupefied air, and the latter, making an effort, arose and
stepped between the two young men. Albert's attack on Andrea had placed
him on a different footing, and he hoped this visit had another cause
than that he had at first supposed.

"Indeed, sir," said he to Albert, "if you are come to quarrel with this
gentleman because I have preferred him to you, I shall resign the case
to the king's attorney."

"You mistake, sir," said Morcerf with a gloomy smile; "I am not
referring in the least to matrimony, and I only addressed myself to M.
Cavalcanti because he appeared disposed to interfere between us. In one
respect you are right, for I am ready to quarrel with everyone today;
but you have the first claim, M. Danglars."


"Sir," replied Danglars, pale with anger and fear, "I warn you, when I
have the misfortune to meet with a mad dog, I kill it; and far from
thinking myself guilty of a crime, I believe I do society a kindness.
Now, if you are mad and try to bite me, I will kill you without pity. Is
it my fault that your father has dishonored himself?"

"Yes, miserable wretch!" cried Morcerf, "it is your fault." Danglars
retreated a few steps. "My fault?" said he; "you must be mad! What do I
know of the Grecian affair? Have I travelled in that country? Did I
advise your father to sell the castle of Yanina--to betray----"

"Silence!" said Albert, with a thundering voice. "No; it is not you who
have directly made this exposure and brought this sorrow on us, but you
hypocritically provoked it."

"I?"

"Yes; you! How came it known?"

"I suppose you read it in the paper in the account from Yanina?"

"Who wrote to Yanina?"

"To Yanina?"

"Yes. Who wrote for particulars concerning my father?"

"I imagine anyone may write to Yanina."

"But one person only wrote!"

"One only?"

"Yes; and that was you!"

"I, doubtless, wrote. It appears to me that when about to marry your
daughter to a young man, it is right to make some inquiries respecting
his family; it is not only a right, but a duty."

"You wrote, sir, knowing what answer you would receive."

"I, indeed? I assure you," cried Danglars, with a confidence and
security proceeding less from fear than from the interest he really felt
for the young man, "I solemnly declare to you, that I should never have
thought of writing to Yanina, did I know anything of Ali Pasha's
misfortunes."

"Who, then, urged you to write? Tell me."

"_Pardieu!_ it was the most simple thing in the world. I was speaking of
your father's past history. I said the origin of his fortune remained
obscure. The person to whom I addressed my scruples asked me where your
father had acquired his property? I answered, 'In Greece.'--'Then,' said
he, 'write to Yanina.'"

"And who thus advised you?"

"No other than your friend, Monte Cristo."

"The Count of Monte Cristo told you to write to Yanina?"

"Yes; and I wrote, and will show you my correspondence, if you like."
Albert and Beauchamp looked at each other. "Sir," said Beauchamp, who
had not yet spoken, "you appear to accuse the count, who is absent from
Paris at this moment, and cannot justify himself."

"I accuse no one, sir," said Danglars; "I relate, and I will repeat
before the count what I have said to you."

"Does the count know what answer you received?"

"Yes; I showed it to him."

"Did he know my father's Christian name was Fernand, and his family name
Mondego?"

"Yes, I had told him that long since, and I did only what any other
would have done in my circumstances, and perhaps less. When, the day
after the arrival of this answer, your father came by the advice of
Monte Cristo to ask my daughter's hand for you, I decidedly refused him,
but without any explanation or exposure. In short, why should I have any
more to do with the affair? How did the honor or disgrace of M. de
Morcerf affect me? It neither increased nor decreased my income."

Albert felt the blood mounting to his brow; there was no doubt upon the
subject. Danglars defended himself with the baseness, but at the same
time with the assurance, of a man who speaks the truth, at least in
part, if not wholly--not for conscience' sake, but through fear.
Besides, what was Morcerf seeking? It was not whether Danglars or Monte
Cristo was more or less guilty; it was a man who would answer for the
offence, whether trifling or serious; it was a man who would fight, and
it was evident Danglars would not fight. And, in addition to this,
everything forgotten or unperceived before presented itself now to his
recollection. Monte Cristo knew everything, as he had bought the
daughter of Ali Pasha; and, knowing everything, he had advised Danglars
to write to Yanina. The answer known, he had yielded to Albert's wish to
be introduced to Haydée, and allowed the conversation to turn on the
death of Ali, and had not opposed Haydée's recital (but having,
doubtless, warned the young girl, in the few Romaic words he spoke to
her, not to implicate Morcerf's father). Besides, had he not begged of
Morcerf not to mention his father's name before Haydée? Lastly, he had
taken Albert to Normandy when he knew the final blow was near. There
could be no doubt that all had been calculated and previously arranged;
Monte Cristo then was in league with his father's enemies. Albert took
Beauchamp aside, and communicated these ideas to him.

"You are right," said the latter; "M. Danglars has only been a secondary
agent in this sad affair, and it is of M. de Monte Cristo that you must
demand an explanation." Albert turned. "Sir," said he to Danglars,
"understand that I do not take a final leave of you; I must ascertain if
your insinuations are just, and am going now to inquire of the Count of
Monte Cristo." He bowed to the banker, and went out with Beauchamp,
without appearing to notice Cavalcanti. Danglars accompanied him to the
door, where he again assured Albert that no motive of personal hatred
had influenced him against the Count of Morcerf.



Chapter 88. The Insult

At the banker's door Beauchamp stopped Morcerf. "Listen," said he; "just
now I told you it was of M. de Monte Cristo you must demand an
explanation."

"Yes; and we are going to his house."

"Reflect, Morcerf, one moment before you go."
