calculated the time; then he saw the remains of the bed on which the
poor prisoner had died. The sight of this, instead of exciting the
anguish experienced by the count in the dungeon, filled his heart with a
soft and grateful sentiment, and tears fell from his eyes.

"This is where the mad abbé was kept, sir, and that is where the young
man entered;" and the guide pointed to the opening, which had remained
unclosed. "From the appearance of the stone," he continued, "a learned
gentleman discovered that the prisoners might have communicated together
for ten years. Poor things! Those must have been ten weary years."

Dantès took some louis from his pocket, and gave them to the man who had
twice unconsciously pitied him. The guide took them, thinking them
merely a few pieces of little value; but the light of the torch revealed
their true worth. "Sir," he said, "you have made a mistake; you have
given me gold."

"I know it." The concierge looked upon the count with surprise. "Sir,"
he cried, scarcely able to believe his good fortune--"sir, I cannot
understand your generosity!"

"Oh, it is very simple, my good fellow; I have been a sailor, and your
story touched me more than it would others."

"Then, sir, since you are so liberal, I ought to offer you something."


"What have you to offer to me, my friend? Shells? Straw-work? Thank
you!"

"No, sir, neither of those; something connected with this story."

"Really? What is it?"

"Listen," said the guide; "I said to myself, 'Something is always left
in a cell inhabited by one prisoner for fifteen years,' so I began to
sound the wall."

"Ah," cried Monte Cristo, remembering the abbé's two hiding-places.

"After some search, I found that the floor gave a hollow sound near the
head of the bed, and at the hearth."

"Yes," said the count, "yes."

"I raised the stones, and found----"

"A rope-ladder and some tools?"

"How do you know that?" asked the guide in astonishment.

"I do not know--I only guess it, because that sort of thing is generally
found in prisoners' cells."

"Yes, sir, a rope-ladder and tools."

"And have you them yet?"

"No, sir; I sold them to visitors, who considered them great
curiosities; but I have still something left."

"What is it?" asked the count, impatiently.

"A sort of book, written upon strips of cloth."

"Go and fetch it, my good fellow; and if it be what I hope, you will do
well."

"I will run for it, sir;" and the guide went out. Then the count knelt
down by the side of the bed, which death had converted into an altar.
"Oh, second father," he exclaimed, "thou who hast given me liberty,
knowledge, riches; thou who, like beings of a superior order to
ourselves, couldst understand the science of good and evil; if in the
depths of the tomb there still remain something within us which can
respond to the voice of those who are left on earth; if after death the
soul ever revisit the places where we have lived and suffered,--then,
noble heart, sublime soul, then I conjure thee by the paternal love thou
didst bear me, by the filial obedience I vowed to thee, grant me some
sign, some revelation! Remove from me the remains of doubt, which, if it
change not to conviction, must become remorse!" The count bowed his
head, and clasped his hands together.

"Here, sir," said a voice behind him.

Monte Cristo shuddered, and arose. The concierge held out the strips of
cloth upon which the Abbé Faria had spread the riches of his mind. The
manuscript was the great work by the Abbé Faria upon the kingdoms of
Italy. The count seized it hastily, his eyes immediately fell upon the
epigraph, and he read, "'Thou shalt tear out the dragons' teeth, and
shall trample the lions under foot, saith the Lord.'"

"Ah," he exclaimed, "here is my answer. Thanks, father, thanks." And
feeling in his pocket, he took thence a small pocket-book, which
contained ten bank-notes, each of 1,000 francs.

"Here," he said, "take this pocket-book."

"Do you give it to me?"


"Yes; but only on condition that you will not open it till I am gone;"
and placing in his breast the treasure he had just found, which was more
valuable to him than the richest jewel, he rushed out of the corridor,
and reaching his boat, cried, "To Marseilles!" Then, as he departed, he
fixed his eyes upon the gloomy prison. "Woe," he cried, "to those who
confined me in that wretched prison; and woe to those who forgot that I
was there!" As he repassed the Catalans, the count turned around and
burying his head in his cloak murmured the name of a woman. The victory
was complete; twice he had overcome his doubts. The name he pronounced,
in a voice of tenderness, amounting almost to love, was that of Haydée.

On landing, the count turned towards the cemetery, where he felt sure of
finding Morrel. He, too, ten years ago, had piously sought out a tomb,
and sought it vainly. He, who returned to France with millions, had been
unable to find the grave of his father, who had perished from hunger.
Morrel had indeed placed a cross over the spot, but it had fallen down
and the grave-digger had burnt it, as he did all the old wood in the
churchyard. The worthy merchant had been more fortunate. Dying in the
arms of his children, he had been by them laid by the side of his wife,
who had preceded him in eternity by two years. Two large slabs of
marble, on which were inscribed their names, were placed on either side
of a little enclosure, railed in, and shaded by four cypress-trees.
Morrel was leaning against one of these, mechanically fixing his eyes on
the graves. His grief was so profound that he was nearly unconscious.
"Maximilian," said the count, "you should not look on the graves, but
there;" and he pointed upwards.

"The dead are everywhere," said Morrel; "did you not yourself tell me so
as we left Paris?"

"Maximilian," said the count, "you asked me during the journey to allow
you to remain some days at Marseilles. Do you still wish to do so?"

"I have no wishes, count; only I fancy I could pass the time less
painfully here than anywhere else."

"So much the better, for I must leave you; but I carry your word with
me, do I not?"

"Ah, count, I shall forget it."

"No, you will not forget it, because you are a man of honor, Morrel,
because you have taken an oath, and are about to do so again."

"Oh, count, have pity upon me. I am so unhappy."

"I have known a man much more unfortunate than you, Morrel."

"Impossible!"

"Alas," said Monte Cristo, "it is the infirmity of our nature always to
believe ourselves much more unhappy than those who groan by our sides!"

"What can be more wretched than the man who has lost all he loved and
desired in the world?"

"Listen, Morrel, and pay attention to what I am about to tell you. I
knew a man who like you had fixed all his hopes of happiness upon a
woman. He was young, he had an old father whom he loved, a betrothed
bride whom he adored. He was about to marry her, when one of the
caprices of fate,--which would almost make us doubt the goodness of
Providence, if that Providence did not afterwards reveal itself by
proving that all is but a means of conducting to an end,--one of those
caprices deprived him of his mistress, of the future of which he had
dreamed (for in his blindness he forgot he could only read the present),
and cast him into a dungeon."


"Ah," said Morrel, "one quits a dungeon in a week, a month, or a year."

"He remained there fourteen years, Morrel," said the count, placing his
hand on the young man's shoulder. Maximilian shuddered.

"Fourteen years!" he muttered--"Fourteen years!" repeated the count.
"During that time he had many moments of despair. He also, Morrel, like
you, considered himself the unhappiest of men."

"Well?" asked Morrel.

"Well, at the height of his despair God assisted him through human
means. At first, perhaps, he did not recognize the infinite mercy of the
Lord, but at last he took patience and waited. One day he miraculously
left the prison, transformed, rich, powerful. His first cry was for his
father; but that father was dead."

"My father, too, is dead," said Morrel.

"Yes; but your father died in your arms, happy, respected, rich, and
full of years; his father died poor, despairing, almost doubtful of
Providence; and when his son sought his grave ten years afterwards, his
tomb had disappeared, and no one could say, 'There sleeps the father you
so well loved.'"

"Oh!" exclaimed Morrel.

"He was, then, a more unhappy son than you, Morrel, for he could not
even find his father's grave."

"But then he had the woman he loved still remaining?"

