not all on my side."

"Whence can it arise, then? for you told me your father desired the
marriage."

"It is my mother who dissents; she has a clear and penetrating judgment,
and does not smile on the proposed union. I cannot account for it, but
she seems to entertain some prejudice against the Danglars."


"Ah," said the count, in a somewhat forced tone, "that may be easily
explained; the Comtesse de Morcerf, who is aristocracy and refinement
itself, does not relish the idea of being allied by your marriage with
one of ignoble birth; that is natural enough."

"I do not know if that is her reason," said Albert, "but one thing I do
know, that if this marriage be consummated, it will render her quite
miserable. There was to have been a meeting six weeks ago in order to
talk over and settle the affair; but I had such a sudden attack of
indisposition----"

"Real?" interrupted the count, smiling.

"Oh, real enough, from anxiety doubtless,--at any rate they postponed
the matter for two months. There is no hurry, you know. I am not yet
twenty-one, and Eugénie is only seventeen; but the two months expire
next week. It must be done. My dear count, you cannot imagine how my
mind is harassed. How happy you are in being exempt from all this!"

"Well, and why should not you be free, too? What prevents you from being
so?"

"Oh, it will be too great a disappointment to my father if I do not
marry Mademoiselle Danglars."

"Marry her then," said the count, with a significant shrug of the
shoulders.

"Yes," replied Morcerf, "but that will plunge my mother into positive
grief."

"Then do not marry her," said the count.

"Well, I shall see. I will try and think over what is the best thing to
be done; you will give me your advice, will you not, and if possible
extricate me from my unpleasant position? I think, rather than give pain
to my dear mother, I would run the risk of offending the count." Monte
Cristo turned away; he seemed moved by this last remark. "Ah," said he
to Debray, who had thrown himself into an easy-chair at the farthest
extremity of the salon, and who held a pencil in his right hand and an
account book in his left, "what are you doing there? Are you making a
sketch after Poussin?"

"Oh, no," was the tranquil response; "I am too fond of art to attempt
anything of that sort. I am doing a little sum in arithmetic."

"In arithmetic?"

"Yes; I am calculating--by the way, Morcerf, that indirectly concerns
you--I am calculating what the house of Danglars must have gained by the
last rise in Haiti bonds; from 206 they have risen to 409 in three days,
and the prudent banker had purchased at 206; therefore he must have made
300,000 livres."

"That is not his biggest scoop," said Morcerf; "did he not make a
million in Spaniards this last year?"

"My dear fellow," said Lucien, "here is the Count of Monte Cristo, who
will say to you, as the Italians do,--

"'Denaro e santità, Metà della metà.' [*]


* "Money and sanctity, Each in a moiety.

"When they tell me such things, I only shrug my shoulders and say
nothing."

"But you were speaking of Haitians?" said Monte Cristo.

"Ah, Haitians,--that is quite another thing! Haitians are the _écarté_
of French stock-jobbing. We may like bouillotte, delight in whist, be
enraptured with boston, and yet grow tired of them all; but we always
come back to _écarté_--it is not only a game, it is a _hors-d'œuvre_! M.
Danglars sold yesterday at 405, and pockets 300,000 francs. Had he but
waited till today, the price would have fallen to 205, and instead of
gaining 300,000 francs, he would have lost 20 or 25,000."

"And what has caused the sudden fall from 409 to 206?" asked Monte
Cristo. "I am profoundly ignorant of all these stock-jobbing intrigues."

"Because," said Albert, laughing, "one piece of news follows another,
and there is often great dissimilarity between them."

"Ah," said the count, "I see that M. Danglars is accustomed to play at
gaining or losing 300,000 francs in a day; he must be enormously rich."

"It is not he who plays!" exclaimed Lucien; "it is Madame Danglars; she
is indeed daring."

"But you who are a reasonable being, Lucien, and who knows how little
dependence is to be placed on the news, since you are at the fountain-
head, surely you ought to prevent it," said Morcerf, with a smile.

"How can I, if her husband fails in controlling her?" asked Lucien; "you
know the character of the baroness--no one has any influence with her,
and she does precisely what she pleases."

"Ah, if I were in your place----" said Albert.

"Well?"

"I would reform her; it would be rendering a service to her future son-
in-law."

"How would you set about it?"

"Ah, that would be easy enough--I would give her a lesson."

"A lesson?"

"Yes. Your position as secretary to the minister renders your authority
great on the subject of political news; you never open your mouth but
the stockbrokers immediately stenograph your words. Cause her to lose a
hundred thousand francs, and that would teach her prudence."

"I do not understand," stammered Lucien.

"It is very clear, notwithstanding," replied the young man, with an
artlessness wholly free from affectation; "tell her some fine morning an
unheard-of piece of intelligence--some telegraphic despatch, of which
you alone are in possession; for instance, that Henri IV. was seen
yesterday at Gabrielle's. That would boom the market; she will buy
heavily, and she will certainly lose when Beauchamp announces the
following day, in his gazette, 'The report circulated by some usually
well-informed persons that the king was seen yesterday at Gabrielle's
house, is totally without foundation. We can positively assert that his
majesty did not quit the Pont-Neuf.'" Lucien half smiled. Monte Cristo,
although apparently indifferent, had not lost one word of this
conversation, and his penetrating eye had even read a hidden secret in
the embarrassed manner of the secretary. This embarrassment had
completely escaped Albert, but it caused Lucien to shorten his visit; he
was evidently ill at ease. The count, in taking leave of him, said
something in a low voice, to which he answered, "Willingly, count; I
accept." The count returned to young Morcerf.

"Do you not think, on reflection," said he to him, "that you have done
wrong in thus speaking of your mother-in-law in the presence of M.
Debray?"

"My dear count," said Morcerf, "I beg of you not to apply that title so
prematurely."

"Now, speaking without any exaggeration, is your mother really so very
much averse to this marriage?"

"So much so that the baroness very rarely comes to the house, and my
mother, has not, I think, visited Madame Danglars twice in her whole
life."

"Then," said the count, "I am emboldened to speak openly to you. M.
Danglars is my banker; M. de Villefort has overwhelmed me with
politeness in return for a service which a casual piece of good fortune
enabled me to render him. I predict from all this an avalanche of
dinners and routs. Now, in order not to presume on this, and also to be
beforehand with them, I have, if agreeable to you, thought of inviting
M. and Madame Danglars, and M. and Madame de Villefort, to my country-
house at Auteuil. If I were to invite you and the Count and Countess of
Morcerf to this dinner, I should give it the appearance of being a
matrimonial meeting, or at least Madame de Morcerf would look upon the
affair in that light, especially if Baron Danglars did me the honor to
bring his daughter. In that case your mother would hold me in aversion,
and I do not at all wish that; on the contrary, I desire to stand high
in her esteem."

"Indeed, count," said Morcerf, "I thank you sincerely for having used so
much candor towards me, and I gratefully accept the exclusion which you
propose. You say you desire my mother's good opinion; I assure you it is
already yours to a very unusual extent."


"Do you think so?" said Monte Cristo, with interest.

"Oh, I am sure of it; we talked of you an hour after you left us the
other day. But to return to what we were saying. If my mother could know
of this attention on your part--and I will venture to tell her--I am
sure that she will be most grateful to you; it is true that my father
will be equally angry." The count laughed. "Well," said he to Morcerf,
"but I think your father will not be the only angry one; M. and Madame
Danglars will think me a very ill-mannered person. They know that I am
intimate with you--that you are, in fact; one of the oldest of my
Parisian acquaintances--and they will not find you at my house; they
will certainly ask me why I did not invite you. Be sure to provide
yourself with some previous engagement which shall have a semblance of
probability, and communicate the fact to me by a line in writing. You
know that with bankers nothing but a written document will be valid."

"I will do better than that," said Albert; "my mother is wishing to go
to the sea-side--what day is fixed for your dinner?"

