
"I have already told you it is a fancy you have taken in your head."

"What fortune has she?"

"But I tell you----"

"A million?" Andrea shrugged his shoulders.

"Let it be a million," said Caderousse; "you can never have so much as I
wish you."

"Thank you," said the young man.

"Oh, I wish it you with all my heart!" added Caderousse with his hoarse
laugh. "Stop, let me show you the way."

"It is not worthwhile."

"Yes, it is."

"Why?"

"Because there is a little secret, a precaution I thought it desirable
to take, one of Huret & Fichet's locks, revised and improved by Gaspard
Caderousse; I will manufacture you a similar one when you are a
capitalist."

"Thank you," said Andrea; "I will let you know a week beforehand." They
parted. Caderousse remained on the landing until he had not only seen
Andrea go down the three stories, but also cross the court. Then he
returned hastily, shut his door carefully, and began to study, like a
clever architect, the plan Andrea had left him.

"Dear Benedetto," said he, "I think he will not be sorry to inherit his
fortune, and he who hastens the day when he can touch his five hundred
thousand will not be his worst friend."



Chapter 82. The Burglary

The day following that on which the conversation we have related took
place, the Count of Monte Cristo set out for Auteuil, accompanied by Ali
and several attendants, and also taking with him some horses whose
qualities he was desirous of ascertaining. He was induced to undertake
this journey, of which the day before he had not even thought and which
had not occurred to Andrea either, by the arrival of Bertuccio from
Normandy with intelligence respecting the house and sloop. The house was
ready, and the sloop which had arrived a week before lay at anchor in a
small creek with her crew of six men, who had observed all the requisite
formalities and were ready again to put to sea.

The count praised Bertuccio's zeal, and ordered him to prepare for a
speedy departure, as his stay in France would not be prolonged more than
a month. "Now," said he, "I may require to go in one night from Paris to
Tréport; let eight fresh horses be in readiness on the road, which will
enable me to go fifty leagues in ten hours."

"Your highness had already expressed that wish," said Bertuccio, "and
the horses are ready. I have bought them, and stationed them myself at
the most desirable posts, that is, in villages, where no one generally
stops."

"That's well," said Monte Cristo; "I remain here a day or two--arrange
accordingly." As Bertuccio was leaving the room to give the requisite
orders, Baptistin opened the door: he held a letter on a silver waiter.

"What are you doing here?" asked the count, seeing him covered with
dust; "I did not send for you, I think?"

Baptistin, without answering, approached the count, and presented the
letter. "Important and urgent," said he. The count opened the letter,
and read:--

"M. de Monte Cristo is apprised that this night a man will enter his
house in the Champs-Élysées with the intention of carrying off some
papers supposed to be in the secretary desk in the dressing-room. The
count's well-known courage will render unnecessary the aid of the
police, whose interference might seriously affect him who sends this
advice. The count, by any opening from the bedroom, or by concealing
himself in the dressing-room, would be able to defend his property
himself. Many attendants or apparent precautions would prevent the
villain from the attempt, and M. de Monte Cristo would lose the
opportunity of discovering an enemy whom chance has revealed to him who
now sends this warning to the count,--a warning he might not be able to
send another time, if this first attempt should fail and another be
made."

The count's first idea was that this was an artifice--a gross deception,
to draw his attention from a minor danger in order to expose him to a
greater. He was on the point of sending the letter to the commissary of
police, notwithstanding the advice of his anonymous friend, or perhaps
because of that advice, when suddenly the idea occurred to him that it
might be some personal enemy, whom he alone should recognize and over
whom, if such were the case, he alone would gain any advantage, as
Fiesco [*] had done over the Moor who would have killed him. We know the
Count's vigorous and daring mind, denying anything to be impossible,
with that energy which marks the great man. From his past life, from his
resolution to shrink from nothing, the count had acquired an
inconceivable relish for the contests in which he had engaged, sometimes
against nature, that is to say, against God, and sometimes against the
world, that is, against the devil.


* The Genoese conspirator.

"They do not want my papers," said Monte Cristo, "they want to kill me;
they are no robbers, but assassins. I will not allow the prefect of
police to interfere with my private affairs. I am rich enough, forsooth,
to distribute his authority on this occasion." The count recalled
Baptistin, who had left the room after delivering the letter. "Return to
Paris," said he; "assemble the servants who remain there. I want all my
household at Auteuil."

"But will no one remain in the house, my lord?" asked Baptistin.

"Yes, the porter."

"My lord will remember that the lodge is at a distance from the house."

"Well?"

"The house might be stripped without his hearing the least noise."

"By whom?"

"By thieves."

"You are a fool, M. Baptistin. Thieves might strip the house--it would
annoy me less than to be disobeyed." Baptistin bowed.


"You understand me?" said the count. "Bring your comrades here, one and
all; but let everything remain as usual, only close the shutters of the
ground floor."

"And those of the first floor?"

"You know they are never closed. Go!"

The count signified his intention of dining alone, and that no one but
Ali should attend him. Having dined with his usual tranquillity and
moderation, the count, making a signal to Ali to follow him, went out by
the side-gate and on reaching the Bois de Boulogne turned, apparently
without design towards Paris and at twilight; found himself opposite his
house in the Champs-Élysées. All was dark; one solitary, feeble light
was burning in the porter's lodge, about forty paces distant from the
house, as Baptistin had said. Monte Cristo leaned against a tree, and
with that scrutinizing glance which was so rarely deceived, looked up
and down the avenue, examined the passers-by, and carefully looked down
the neighboring streets, to see that no one was concealed. Ten minutes
passed thus, and he was convinced that no one was watching him. He
hastened to the side-door with Ali, entered hurriedly, and by the
servants' staircase, of which he had the key, gained his bedroom without
opening or disarranging a single curtain, without even the porter having
the slightest suspicion that the house, which he supposed empty,
contained its chief occupant.

Arrived in his bedroom, the count motioned to Ali to stop; then he
passed into the dressing-room, which he examined. Everything appeared as
usual--the precious secretary desk in its place, and the key in the
secretary desk. He double locked it, took the key, returned to the
bedroom door, removed the double staple of the bolt, and went in.
Meanwhile Ali had procured the arms the count required--namely, a short
carbine and a pair of double-barrelled pistols, with which as sure an
aim might be taken as with a single-barrelled one. Thus armed, the count
held the lives of five men in his hands. It was about half-past nine.
The count and Ali ate in haste a crust of bread and drank a glass of
Spanish wine; then Monte Cristo slipped aside one of the movable panels,
which enabled him to see into the adjoining room. He had within his
reach his pistols and carbine, and Ali, standing near him, held one of
the small Arabian hatchets, whose form has not varied since the
Crusades. Through one of the windows of the bedroom, on a line with that
in the dressing-room, the count could see into the street.

Two hours passed thus. It was intensely dark; still Ali, thanks to his
wild nature, and the count, thanks doubtless to his long confinement,
could distinguish in the darkness the slightest movement of the trees.
The little light in the lodge had long been extinct. It might be
expected that the attack, if indeed an attack was projected, would be
made from the staircase of the ground floor, and not from a window; in
Monte Cristo's opinion, the villains sought his life, not his money. It
would be his bedroom they would attack, and they must reach it by the
back staircase, or by the window in the dressing-room. The clock of the
Invalides struck a quarter to twelve; the west wind bore on its
moistened gusts the doleful vibration of the three strokes.


As the last stroke died away, the count thought he heard a slight noise
in the dressing-room; this first sound, or rather this first grinding,
was followed by a second, then a third; at the fourth, the count knew
what to expect. A firm and well-practised hand was engaged in cutting
the four sides of a pane of glass with a diamond. The count felt his
heart beat more rapidly. Inured as men may be to danger, forewarned as
they may be of peril, they understand, by the fluttering of the heart
and the shuddering of the frame, the enormous difference between a dream
and a reality, between the project and the execution. However, Monte
Cristo only made a sign to apprise Ali, who, understanding that danger
was approaching from the other side, drew nearer to his master. Monte
