walk of sixty feet in a garden of only twenty.

Never had Flora, the fresh and smiling goddess of gardeners, been
honored with a purer or more scrupulous worship than that which was paid
to her in this little enclosure. In fact, of the twenty rose-trees which
formed the _parterre_, not one bore the mark of the slug, nor were there
evidences anywhere of the clustering aphis which is so destructive to
plants growing in a damp soil. And yet it was not because the damp had
been excluded from the garden; the earth, black as soot, the thick
foliage of the trees betrayed its presence; besides, had natural
humidity been wanting, it could have been immediately supplied by
artificial means, thanks to a tank of water, sunk in one of the corners
of the garden, and upon which were stationed a frog and a toad, who,
from antipathy, no doubt, always remained on the two opposite sides of
the basin. There was not a blade of grass to be seen in the paths, or a
weed in the flower-beds; no fine lady ever trained and watered her
geraniums, her cacti, and her rhododendrons, in her porcelain
_jardinière_ with more pains than this hitherto unseen gardener bestowed
upon his little enclosure. Monte Cristo stopped after having closed the
gate and fastened the string to the nail, and cast a look around.

"The man at the telegraph," said he, "must either engage a gardener or
devote himself passionately to agriculture." Suddenly he struck against
something crouching behind a wheelbarrow filled with leaves; the
something rose, uttering an exclamation of astonishment, and Monte
Cristo found himself facing a man about fifty years old, who was
plucking strawberries, which he was placing upon grape leaves. He had
twelve leaves and about as many strawberries, which, on rising suddenly,
he let fall from his hand. "You are gathering your crop, sir?" said
Monte Cristo, smiling.


"Excuse me, sir," replied the man, raising his hand to his cap; "I am
not up there, I know, but I have only just come down."

"Do not let me interfere with you in anything, my friend," said the
count; "gather your strawberries, if, indeed, there are any left."

"I have ten left," said the man, "for here are eleven, and I had twenty-
one, five more than last year. But I am not surprised; the spring has
been warm this year, and strawberries require heat, sir. This is the
reason that, instead of the sixteen I had last year, I have this year,
you see, eleven, already plucked--twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen,
sixteen, seventeen, eighteen. Ah, I miss three, they were here last
night, sir--I am sure they were here--I counted them. It must be the son
of Mère Simon who has stolen them; I saw him strolling about here this
morning. Ah, the young rascal--stealing in a garden--he does not know
where that may lead him to."

"Certainly, it is wrong," said Monte Cristo, "but you should take into
consideration the youth and greediness of the delinquent."

"Of course," said the gardener, "but that does not make it the less
unpleasant. But, sir, once more I beg pardon; perhaps you are an officer
that I am detaining here." And he glanced timidly at the count's blue
coat.


"Calm yourself, my friend," said the count, with the smile which he made
at will either terrible or benevolent, and which now expressed only the
kindliest feeling; "I am not an inspector, but a traveller, brought here
by a curiosity he half repents of, since he causes you to lose your
time."

"Ah, my time is not valuable," replied the man with a melancholy smile.
"Still it belongs to government, and I ought not to waste it; but,
having received the signal that I might rest for an hour" (here he
glanced at the sun-dial, for there was everything in the enclosure of
Montlhéry, even a sun-dial), "and having ten minutes before me, and my
strawberries being ripe, when a day longer--by-the-by, sir, do you think
dormice eat them?"

"Indeed, I should think not," replied Monte Cristo; "dormice are bad
neighbors for us who do not eat them preserved, as the Romans did."

"What? Did the Romans eat them?" said the gardener--"ate dormice?"

"I have read so in Petronius," said the count.

"Really? They can't be nice, though they do say 'as fat as a dormouse.'
It is not a wonder they are fat, sleeping all day, and only waking to
eat all night. Listen. Last year I had four apricots--they stole one, I
had one nectarine, only one--well, sir, they ate half of it on the wall;
a splendid nectarine--I never ate a better."

"You ate it?"

"That is to say, the half that was left--you understand; it was
exquisite, sir. Ah, those gentlemen never choose the worst morsels; like
Mère Simon's son, who has not chosen the worst strawberries. But this
year," continued the horticulturist, "I'll take care it shall not
happen, even if I should be forced to sit by the whole night to watch
when the strawberries are ripe." Monte Cristo had seen enough. Every man
has a devouring passion in his heart, as every fruit has its worm; that
of the telegraph man was horticulture. He began gathering the grape-
leaves which screened the sun from the grapes, and won the heart of the
gardener. "Did you come here, sir, to see the telegraph?" he said.

"Yes, if it isn't contrary to the rules."

"Oh, no," said the gardener; "not in the least, since there is no danger
that anyone can possibly understand what we are saying."

"I have been told," said the count, "that you do not always yourselves
understand the signals you repeat."

"That is true, sir, and that is what I like best," said the man,
smiling.

"Why do you like that best?"

"Because then I have no responsibility. I am a machine then, and nothing
else, and so long as I work, nothing more is required of me."

"Is it possible," said Monte Cristo to himself, "that I can have met
with a man that has no ambition? That would spoil my plans."

"Sir," said the gardener, glancing at the sun-dial, "the ten minutes are
almost up; I must return to my post. Will you go up with me?"

"I follow you." Monte Cristo entered the tower, which was divided into
three stories. The tower contained implements, such as spades, rakes,
watering-pots, hung against the wall; this was all the furniture. The
second was the man's conventional abode, or rather sleeping-place; it
contained a few poor articles of household furniture--a bed, a table,
two chairs, a stone pitcher--and some dry herbs, hung up to the ceiling,
which the count recognized as sweet peas, and of which the good man was
preserving the seeds; he had labelled them with as much care as if he
had been master botanist in the Jardin des Plantes.

"Does it require much study to learn the art of telegraphing?" asked
Monte Cristo.

"The study does not take long; it was acting as a supernumerary that was
so tedious."

"And what is the pay?"

"A thousand francs, sir."

"It is nothing."

"No; but then we are lodged, as you perceive."

Monte Cristo looked at the room. They passed to the third story; it was
the telegraph room. Monte Cristo looked in turn at the two iron handles
by which the machine was worked. "It is very interesting," he said, "but
it must be very tedious for a lifetime."

"Yes. At first my neck was cramped with looking at it, but at the end of
a year I became used to it; and then we have our hours of recreation,
and our holidays."

"Holidays?"

"Yes."

"When?"

"When we have a fog."

"Ah, to be sure."

"Those are indeed holidays to me; I go into the garden, I plant, I
prune, I trim, I kill the insects all day long."

"How long have you been here?"

"Ten years, and five as a supernumerary make fifteen."

"You are----"

"Fifty-five years old."

"How long must you have served to claim the pension?"

"Oh, sir, twenty-five years."

"And how much is the pension?"

"A hundred crowns."

"Poor humanity!" murmured Monte Cristo.

"What did you say, sir?" asked the man.

"I was saying it was very interesting."

"What was?"

"All you were showing me. And you really understand none of these
signals?"

"None at all."

"And have you never tried to understand them?"

"Never. Why should I?"

"But still there are some signals only addressed to you."
