After which the curtain again fell, and the spectators poured forth from
the theatre into the lobbies and salon. The count left his box, and a
moment later was saluting the Baronne Danglars, who could not restrain a
cry of mingled pleasure and surprise. "You are welcome, count!" she
exclaimed, as he entered. "I have been most anxious to see you, that I
might repeat orally the thanks writing can so ill express."

"Surely so trifling a circumstance cannot deserve a place in your
remembrance. Believe me, madame, I had entirely forgotten it."

"But it is not so easy to forget, monsieur, that the very next day after
your princely gift you saved the life of my dear friend, Madame de
Villefort, which was endangered by the very animals your generosity
restored to me."


"This time, at least, I do not deserve your thanks. It was Ali, my
Nubian slave, who rendered this service to Madame de Villefort."

"Was it Ali," asked the Count of Morcerf, "who rescued my son from the
hands of bandits?"

"No, count," replied Monte Cristo taking the hand held out to him by the
general; "in this instance I may fairly and freely accept your thanks;
but you have already tendered them, and fully discharged your debt--if
indeed there existed one--and I feel almost mortified to find you still
reverting to the subject. May I beg of you, baroness, to honor me with
an introduction to your daughter?"

"Oh, you are no stranger--at least not by name," replied Madame
Danglars, "and the last two or three days we have really talked of
nothing but you. Eugénie," continued the baroness, turning towards her
daughter, "this is the Count of Monte Cristo." The Count bowed, while
Mademoiselle Danglars bent her head slightly. "You have a charming young
person with you tonight, count," said Eugénie. "Is she your daughter?"

"No, mademoiselle," said Monte Cristo, astonished at the coolness and
freedom of the question. "She is a poor unfortunate Greek left under my
care."

"And what is her name?"

"Haydée," replied Monte Cristo.

"A Greek?" murmured the Count of Morcerf.

"Yes, indeed, count," said Madame Danglars; "and tell me, did you ever
see at the court of Ali Tepelini, whom you so gloriously and valiantly
served, a more exquisite beauty or richer costume?"

"Did I hear rightly, monsieur," said Monte Cristo "that you served at
Yanina?"

"I was inspector-general of the pasha's troops," replied Morcerf; "and
it is no secret that I owe my fortune, such as it is, to the liberality
of the illustrious Albanese chief."

"But look!" exclaimed Madame Danglars.

"Where?" stammered Morcerf.

"There," said Monte Cristo placing his arms around the count, and
leaning with him over the front of the box, just as Haydée, whose eyes
were occupied in examining the theatre in search of her guardian,
perceived his pale features close to Morcerf's face. It was as if the
young girl beheld the head of Medusa. She bent forwards as though to
assure herself of the reality of what she saw, then, uttering a faint
cry, threw herself back in her seat. The sound was heard by the people
about Ali, who instantly opened the box-door. "Why, count," exclaimed
Eugénie, "what has happened to your ward? she seems to have been taken
suddenly ill.

"Very probably," answered the count. "But do not be alarmed on her
account. Haydée's nervous system is delicately organized, and she is
peculiarly susceptible to the odors even of flowers--nay, there are some
which cause her to faint if brought into her presence. However,"
continued Monte Cristo, drawing a small phial from his pocket, "I have
an infallible remedy." So saying, he bowed to the baroness and her
daughter, exchanged a parting shake of the hand with Debray and the
count, and left Madame Danglars' box. Upon his return to Haydée he found
her still very pale. As soon as she saw him she seized his hand; her own
hands were moist and icy cold. "Who was it you were talking with over
there?" she asked.


"With the Count of Morcerf," answered Monte Cristo. "He tells me he
served your illustrious father, and that he owes his fortune to him."

"Wretch!" exclaimed Haydée, her eyes flashing with rage; "he sold my
father to the Turks, and the fortune he boasts of was the price of his
treachery! Did not you know that, my dear lord?"

"Something of this I heard in Epirus," said Monte Cristo; "but the
particulars are still unknown to me. You shall relate them to me, my
child. They are, no doubt, both curious and interesting."

"Yes, yes; but let us go. I feel as though it would kill me to remain
long near that dreadful man." So saying, Haydée arose, and wrapping
herself in her burnouse of white cashmere embroidered with pearls and
coral, she hastily quitted the box at the moment when the curtain was
rising upon the fourth act.

"Do you observe," said the Countess G---- to Albert, who had returned to
her side, "that man does nothing like other people; he listens most
devoutly to the third act of _Robert le Diable_, and when the fourth
begins, takes his departure."



Chapter 54. A Flurry in Stocks

Some days after this meeting, Albert de Morcerf visited the Count of
Monte Cristo at his house in the Champs-Élysées, which had already
assumed that palace-like appearance which the count's princely fortune
enabled him to give even to his most temporary residences. He came to
renew the thanks of Madame Danglars which had been already conveyed to
the count through the medium of a letter, signed "Baronne Danglars,
_née_ Hermine de Servieux."

Albert was accompanied by Lucien Debray, who, joining in his friend's
conversation, added some passing compliments, the source of which the
count's talent for finesse easily enabled him to guess. He was convinced
that Lucien's visit was due to a double feeling of curiosity, the larger
half of which sentiment emanated from the Rue de la Chaussée d'Antin. In
short, Madame Danglars, not being able personally to examine in detail
the domestic economy and household arrangements of a man who gave away
horses worth 30,000 francs and who went to the opera with a Greek slave
wearing diamonds to the amount of a million of money, had deputed those
eyes, by which she was accustomed to see, to give her a faithful account
of the mode of life of this incomprehensible person. But the count did
not appear to suspect that there could be the slightest connection
between Lucien's visit and the curiosity of the baroness.

"You are in constant communication with the Baron Danglars?" the count
inquired of Albert de Morcerf.

"Yes, count, you know what I told you?"

"All remains the same, then, in that quarter?"

"It is more than ever a settled thing," said Lucien,--and, considering
that this remark was all that he was at that time called upon to make,
he adjusted the glass to his eye, and biting the top of his gold headed
cane, began to make the tour of the apartment, examining the arms and
the pictures.

"Ah," said Monte Cristo "I did not expect that the affair would be so
promptly concluded."

"Oh, things take their course without our assistance. While we are
forgetting them, they are falling into their appointed order; and when,
again, our attention is directed to them, we are surprised at the
progress they have made towards the proposed end. My father and M.
Danglars served together in Spain, my father in the army and M. Danglars
in the commissariat department. It was there that my father, ruined by
the revolution, and M. Danglars, who never had possessed any patrimony,
both laid the foundations of their different fortunes."

"Yes," said Monte Cristo "I think M. Danglars mentioned that in a visit
which I paid him; and," continued he, casting a side-glance at Lucien,
who was turning over the leaves of an album, "Mademoiselle Eugénie is
pretty--I think I remember that to be her name."

"Very pretty, or rather, very beautiful," replied Albert, "but of that
style of beauty which I do not appreciate; I am an ungrateful fellow."

"You speak as if you were already her husband."

"Ah," returned Albert, in his turn looking around to see what Lucien was
doing.

"Really," said Monte Cristo, lowering his voice, "you do not appear to
me to be very enthusiastic on the subject of this marriage."

"Mademoiselle Danglars is too rich for me," replied Morcerf, "and that
frightens me."

"Bah," exclaimed Monte Cristo, "that's a fine reason to give. Are you
not rich yourself?"

"My father's income is about 50,000 francs per annum; and he will give
me, perhaps, ten or twelve thousand when I marry."

"That, perhaps, might not be considered a large sum, in Paris
especially," said the count; "but everything does not depend on wealth,
and it is a fine thing to have a good name, and to occupy a high station
in society. Your name is celebrated, your position magnificent; and then
the Comte de Morcerf is a soldier, and it is pleasing to see the
integrity of a Bayard united to the poverty of a Duguesclin;
disinterestedness is the brightest ray in which a noble sword can shine.
As for me, I consider the union with Mademoiselle Danglars a most
suitable one; she will enrich you, and you will ennoble her." Albert
shook his head, and looked thoughtful. "There is still something else,"
said he.

"I confess," observed Monte Cristo, "that I have some difficulty in
comprehending your objection to a young lady who is both rich and
beautiful."

"Oh," said Morcerf, "this repugnance, if repugnance it may be called, is
