frequently used instead of chairs; his back was turned towards me, so
that I could not see the expression of his countenance--neither should I
have been able to do so had he been placed differently, as his head was
buried between his two hands. La Carconte continued to gaze on him for
some time, then shrugging her shoulders, she took her seat immediately
opposite to him. At this moment the expiring embers threw up a fresh
flame from the kindling of a piece of wood that lay near, and a bright
light flashed over the room. La Carconte still kept her eyes fixed on
her husband, but as he made no sign of changing his position, she
extended her hard, bony hand, and touched him on the forehead.


"Caderousse shuddered. The woman's lips seemed to move, as though she
were talking; but because she merely spoke in an undertone, or my senses
were dulled by sleep, I did not catch a word she uttered. Confused
sights and sounds seemed to float before me, and gradually I fell into a
deep, heavy slumber. How long I had been in this unconscious state I
know not, when I was suddenly aroused by the report of a pistol,
followed by a fearful cry. Weak and tottering footsteps resounded across
the chamber above me, and the next instant a dull, heavy weight seemed
to fall powerless on the staircase. I had not yet fully recovered
consciousness, when again I heard groans, mingled with half-stifled
cries, as if from persons engaged in a deadly struggle. A cry more
prolonged than the others and ending in a series of groans effectually
roused me from my drowsy lethargy. Hastily raising myself on one arm, I
looked around, but all was dark; and it seemed to me as if the rain must
have penetrated through the flooring of the room above, for some kind of
moisture appeared to fall, drop by drop, upon my forehead, and when I
passed my hand across my brow, I felt that it was wet and clammy.

"To the fearful noises that had awakened me had succeeded the most
perfect silence--unbroken, save by the footsteps of a man walking about
in the chamber above. The staircase creaked, he descended into the room
below, approached the fire and lit a candle. The man was Caderousse--he
was pale and his shirt was all bloody. Having obtained the light, he
hurried upstairs again, and once more I heard his rapid and uneasy
footsteps. A moment later he came down again, holding in his hand the
small shagreen case, which he opened, to assure himself it contained the
diamond,--seemed to hesitate as to which pocket he should put it in,
then, as if dissatisfied with the security of either pocket, he
deposited it in his red handkerchief, which he carefully rolled round
his head. After this he took from his cupboard the bank-notes and gold
he had put there, thrust the one into the pocket of his trousers, and
the other into that of his waistcoat, hastily tied up a small bundle of
linen, and rushing towards the door, disappeared in the darkness of the
night.

"Then all became clear and manifest to me, and I reproached myself with
what had happened, as though I myself had done the guilty deed. I
fancied that I still heard faint moans, and imagining that the
unfortunate jeweller might not be quite dead, I determined to go to his
relief, by way of atoning in some slight degree, not for the crime I had
committed, but for that which I had not endeavored to prevent. For this
purpose I applied all the strength I possessed to force an entrance from
the cramped spot in which I lay to the adjoining room. The poorly
fastened boards which alone divided me from it yielded to my efforts,
and I found myself in the house. Hastily snatching up the lighted
candle, I hurried to the staircase; about midway a body was lying quite
across the stairs. It was that of La Carconte. The pistol I had heard
had doubtless been fired at her. The shot had frightfully lacerated her
throat, leaving two gaping wounds from which, as well as the mouth, the
blood was pouring in floods. She was stone dead. I strode past her, and
ascended to the sleeping chamber, which presented an appearance of the
wildest disorder. The furniture had been knocked over in the deadly
struggle that had taken place there, and the sheets, to which the
unfortunate jeweller had doubtless clung, were dragged across the room.
The murdered man lay on the floor, his head leaning against the wall,
and about him was a pool of blood which poured forth from three large
wounds in his breast; there was a fourth gash, in which a long table
knife was plunged up to the handle.

"I stumbled over some object; I stooped to examine--it was the second
pistol, which had not gone off, probably from the powder being wet. I
approached the jeweller, who was not quite dead, and at the sound of my
footsteps and the creaking of the floor, he opened his eyes, fixed them
on me with an anxious and inquiring gaze, moved his lips as though
trying to speak, then, overcome by the effort, fell back and expired.
This appalling sight almost bereft me of my senses, and finding that I
could no longer be of service to anyone in the house, my only desire was
to fly. I rushed towards the staircase, clutching my hair, and uttering
a groan of horror. Upon reaching the room below, I found five or six
custom-house officers, and two or three gendarmes--all heavily armed.
They threw themselves upon me. I made no resistance; I was no longer
master of my senses. When I strove to speak, a few inarticulate sounds
alone escaped my lips.

"As I noticed the significant manner in which the whole party pointed to
my blood-stained garments, I involuntarily surveyed myself, and then I
discovered that the thick warm drops that had so bedewed me as I lay
beneath the staircase must have been the blood of La Carconte. I pointed
to the spot where I had concealed myself. 'What does he mean?' asked a
gendarme. One of the officers went to the place I directed. 'He means,'
replied the man upon his return, 'that he got in that way;' and he
showed the hole I had made when I broke through.

"Then I saw that they took me for the assassin. I recovered force and
energy enough to free myself from the hands of those who held me, while
I managed to stammer forth--'I did not do it! Indeed, indeed I did not!'
A couple of gendarmes held the muzzles of their carbines against my
breast.--'Stir but a step,' said they, 'and you are a dead man.'--'Why
should you threaten me with death,' cried I, 'when I have already
declared my innocence?'--'Tush, tush,' cried the men; 'keep your
innocent stories to tell to the judge at Nîmes. Meanwhile, come along
with us; and the best advice we can give you is to do so unresistingly.'
Alas, resistance was far from my thoughts. I was utterly overpowered by
surprise and terror; and without a word I suffered myself to be
handcuffed and tied to a horse's tail, and thus they took me to Nîmes.

"I had been tracked by a customs-officer, who had lost sight of me near
the tavern; feeling certain that I intended to pass the night there, he
had returned to summon his comrades, who just arrived in time to hear
the report of the pistol, and to take me in the midst of such
circumstantial proofs of my guilt as rendered all hopes of proving my
innocence utterly futile. One only chance was left me, that of
beseeching the magistrate before whom I was taken to cause every inquiry
to be made for the Abbé Busoni, who had stopped at the inn of the Pont
du Gard on that morning. If Caderousse had invented the story relative
to the diamond, and there existed no such person as the Abbé Busoni,
then, indeed, I was lost past redemption, or, at least, my life hung
upon the feeble chance of Caderousse himself being apprehended and
confessing the whole truth. Two months passed away in hopeless
expectation on my part, while I must do the magistrate the justice to
say that he used every means to obtain information of the person I
declared could exculpate me if he would. Caderousse still evaded all
pursuit, and I had resigned myself to what seemed my inevitable fate. My
trial was to come on at the approaching assizes; when, on the 8th of
September--that is to say, precisely three months and five days after
the events which had perilled my life--the Abbé Busoni, whom I never
ventured to believe I should see, presented himself at the prison doors,
saying he understood one of the prisoners wished to speak to him; he
added, that having learned at Marseilles the particulars of my
imprisonment, he hastened to comply with my desire. You may easily
imagine with what eagerness I welcomed him, and how minutely I related
the whole of what I had seen and heard. I felt some degree of
nervousness as I entered upon the history of the diamond, but, to my
inexpressible astonishment, he confirmed it in every particular, and to
my equal surprise, he seemed to place entire belief in all I said. And
then it was that, won by his mild charity, seeing that he was acquainted
with all the habits and customs of my own country, and considering also
that pardon for the only crime of which I was really guilty might come
with a double power from lips so benevolent and kind, I besought him to
receive my confession, under the seal of which I recounted the Auteuil
affair in all its details, as well as every other transaction of my
life. That which I had done by the impulse of my best feelings produced
the same effect as though it had been the result of calculation. My
voluntary confession of the assassination at Auteuil proved to him that
I had not committed that of which I stood accused. When he quitted me,
he bade me be of good courage, and to rely upon his doing all in his
power to convince my judges of my innocence.

"I had speedy proofs that the excellent abbé was engaged in my behalf,
for the rigors of my imprisonment were alleviated by many trifling
though acceptable indulgences, and I was told that my trial was to be
postponed to the assizes following those now being held. In the interim
it pleased providence to cause the apprehension of Caderousse, who was
discovered in some distant country, and brought back to France, where he
made a full confession, refusing to make the fact of his wife's having
suggested and arranged the murder any excuse for his own guilt. The
wretched man was sentenced to the galleys for life, and I was
immediately set at liberty."

"And then it was, I presume," said Monte Cristo "that you came to me as
the bearer of a letter from the Abbé Busoni?"

"It was, your excellency; the benevolent abbé took an evident interest
in all that concerned me.

"'Your mode of life as a smuggler,' said he to me one day, 'will be the
ruin of you; if you get out, don't take it up again.'--'But how,'
inquired I, 'am I to maintain myself and my poor sister?'

"'A person, whose confessor I am,' replied he, 'and who entertains a
high regard for me, applied to me a short time since to procure him a
confidential servant. Would you like such a post? If so, I will give you
a letter of introduction to him.'--'Oh, father,' I exclaimed, 'you are
very good.'

"'But you must swear solemnly that I shall never have reason to repent
my recommendation.' I extended my hand, and was about to pledge myself
by any promise he would dictate, but he stopped me. 'It is unnecessary
for you to bind yourself by any vow,' said he; 'I know and admire the
Corsican nature too well to fear you. Here, take this,' continued he,
after rapidly writing the few lines I brought to your excellency, and
upon receipt of which you deigned to receive me into your service, and
proudly I ask whether your excellency has ever had cause to repent
having done so?"

"No," replied the count; "I take pleasure in saying that you have served
me faithfully, Bertuccio; but you might have shown more confidence in
me."

"I, your excellency?"

"Yes; you. How comes it, that having both a sister and an adopted son,
you have never spoken to me of either?"


"Alas, I have still to recount the most distressing period of my life.
Anxious as you may suppose I was to behold and comfort my dear sister, I
lost no time in hastening to Corsica, but when I arrived at Rogliano I
