"What a Puritan you are!" said he; "that happens every day."

"But you cannot break it off in this way; the Morcerfs are depending on
this union."

"Indeed."

"Positively."

"Then let them explain themselves; you should give the father a hint,
you are so intimate with the family."

"I?--where the devil did you find out that?"

"At their ball; it was apparent enough. Why, did not the countess, the
proud Mercédès, the disdainful Catalane, who will scarcely open her lips
to her oldest acquaintances, take your arm, lead you into the garden,
into the private walks, and remain there for half an hour?"

"Ah, baron, baron," said Albert, "you are not listening--what barbarism
in a megalomaniac like you!"

"Oh, don't worry about me, Sir Mocker," said Danglars; then turning to
the count he said, "but will you undertake to speak to the father?"

"Willingly, if you wish it."

"But let it be done explicitly and positively. If he demands my daughter
let him fix the day--declare his conditions; in short, let us either
understand each other, or quarrel. You understand--no more delay."

"Yes, sir, I will give my attention to the subject."

"I do not say that I await with pleasure his decision, but I do await
it. A banker must, you know, be a slave to his promise." And Danglars
sighed as M. Cavalcanti had done half an hour before. "Bravi, bravo,
brava!" cried Morcerf, parodying the banker, as the selection came to an
end. Danglars began to look suspiciously at Morcerf, when someone came
and whispered a few words to him. "I shall soon return," said the banker
to Monte Cristo; "wait for me. I shall, perhaps, have something to say
to you." And he went out.

The baroness took advantage of her husband's absence to push open the
door of her daughter's study, and M. Andrea, who was sitting before the
piano with Mademoiselle Eugénie, started up like a jack-in-the-box.
Albert bowed with a smile to Mademoiselle Danglars, who did not appear
in the least disturbed, and returned his bow with her usual coolness.
Cavalcanti was evidently embarrassed; he bowed to Morcerf, who replied
with the most impertinent look possible. Then Albert launched out in
praise of Mademoiselle Danglars' voice, and on his regret, after what he
had just heard, that he had been unable to be present the previous
evening. Cavalcanti, being left alone, turned to Monte Cristo.

"Come," said Madame Danglars, "leave music and compliments, and let us
go and take tea."

"Come, Louise," said Mademoiselle Danglars to her friend. They passed
into the next drawing-room, where tea was prepared. Just as they were
beginning, in the English fashion, to leave the spoons in their cups,
the door again opened and Danglars entered, visibly agitated. Monte
Cristo observed it particularly, and by a look asked the banker for an
explanation. "I have just received my courier from Greece," said
Danglars.

"Ah, yes," said the count; "that was the reason of your running away
from us."

"Yes."

"How is King Otho getting on?" asked Albert in the most sprightly tone.
Danglars cast another suspicious look towards him without answering, and
Monte Cristo turned away to conceal the expression of pity which passed
over his features, but which was gone in a moment. "We shall go
together, shall we not?" said Albert to the count.

"If you like," replied the latter. Albert could not understand the
banker's look, and turning to Monte Cristo, who understood it
perfectly,--"Did you see," said he, "how he looked at me?"

"Yes," said the count; "but did you think there was anything particular
in his look?"

"Indeed, I did; and what does he mean by his news from Greece?"

"How can I tell you?"

"Because I imagine you have correspondents in that country." Monte
Cristo smiled significantly.

"Stop," said Albert, "here he comes. I shall compliment Mademoiselle
Danglars on her cameo, while the father talks to you."

"If you compliment her at all, let it be on her voice, at least," said
Monte Cristo.

"No, everyone would do that."

"My dear viscount, you are dreadfully impertinent." Albert advanced
towards Eugénie, smiling. Meanwhile, Danglars, stooping to Monte
Cristo's ear, "Your advice was excellent," said he; "there is a whole
history connected with the names Fernand and Yanina."

"Indeed?" said Monte Cristo.

"Yes, I will tell you all; but take away the young man; I cannot endure
his presence."

"He is going with me. Shall I send the father to you?"

"Immediately."

"Very well." The count made a sign to Albert and they bowed to the
ladies, and took their leave, Albert perfectly indifferent to
Mademoiselle Danglars' contempt, Monte Cristo reiterating his advice to
Madame Danglars on the prudence a banker's wife should exercise in
providing for the future. M. Cavalcanti remained master of the field.



Chapter 77. Haydée

Scarcely had the count's horses cleared the angle of the boulevard, than
Albert, turning towards the count, burst into a loud fit of laughter--
much too loud in fact not to give the idea of its being rather forced
and unnatural. "Well," said he, "I will ask you the same question which
Charles IX. put to Catherine de' Medici, after the massacre of Saint
Bartholomew, 'How have I played my little part?'"

"To what do you allude?" asked Monte Cristo.

"To the installation of my rival at M. Danglars'."

"What rival?"

"_Ma foi!_ what rival? Why, your protégé, M. Andrea Cavalcanti!"

"Ah, no joking, viscount, if you please; I do not patronize M. Andrea--
at least, not as concerns M. Danglars."

"And you would be to blame for not assisting him, if the young man
really needed your help in that quarter, but, happily for me, he can
dispense with it."

"What, do you think he is paying his addresses?"

"I am certain of it; his languishing looks and modulated tones when
addressing Mademoiselle Danglars fully proclaim his intentions. He
aspires to the hand of the proud Eugénie."

"What does that signify, so long as they favor your suit?"

"But it is not the case, my dear count: on the contrary. I am repulsed
on all sides."

"What!"

"It is so indeed; Mademoiselle Eugénie scarcely answers me, and
Mademoiselle d'Armilly, her confidant, does not speak to me at all."

"But the father has the greatest regard possible for you," said Monte
Cristo.

"He? Oh, no, he has plunged a thousand daggers into my heart, tragedy-
weapons, I own, which instead of wounding sheathe their points in their
own handles, but daggers which he nevertheless believed to be real and
deadly."

"Jealousy indicates affection."

"True; but I am not jealous."

"He is."

"Of whom?--of Debray?"

"No, of you."

"Of me? I will engage to say that before a week is past the door will be
closed against me."

"You are mistaken, my dear viscount."

"Prove it to me."

"Do you wish me to do so?"

"Yes."

"Well, I am charged with the commission of endeavoring to induce the
Comte de Morcerf to make some definite arrangement with the baron."

"By whom are you charged?"

"By the baron himself."

"Oh," said Albert with all the cajolery of which he was capable. "You
surely will not do that, my dear count?"

"Certainly I shall, Albert, as I have promised to do it."

