on the third row, was a woman of exquisite beauty, dressed in a Greek
costume, which evidently, from the ease and grace with which she wore
it, was her national attire. Behind her, but in deep shadow, was the
outline of a masculine figure; but the features of this latter personage
it was not possible to distinguish. Franz could not forbear breaking in
upon the apparently interesting conversation passing between the
countess and Albert, to inquire of the former if she knew who was the
fair Albanian opposite, since beauty such as hers was well worthy of
being observed by either sex.

"All I can tell about her," replied the countess, "is, that she has been
at Rome since the beginning of the season; for I saw her where she now
sits the very first night of the season, and since then she has never
missed a performance. Sometimes she is accompanied by the person who is
now with her, and at others she is merely attended by a black servant."

"And what do you think of her personal appearance?"

"Oh, I consider her perfectly lovely--she is just my idea of what Medora
must have been."

Franz and the countess exchanged a smile, and then the latter resumed
her conversation with Albert, while Franz returned to his previous
survey of the house and company. The curtain rose on the ballet, which
was one of those excellent specimens of the Italian school, admirably
arranged and put on the stage by Henri, who has established for himself
a great reputation throughout Italy for his taste and skill in the
choreographic art--one of those masterly productions of grace, method,
and elegance in which the whole _corps de ballet_, from the principal
dancers to the humblest supernumerary, are all engaged on the stage at
the same time; and a hundred and fifty persons may be seen exhibiting
the same attitude, or elevating the same arm or leg with a simultaneous
movement, that would lead you to suppose that but one mind, one act of
volition, influenced the moving mass.

The ballet was called _Poliska_.

However much the ballet might have claimed his attention, Franz was too
deeply occupied with the beautiful Greek to take any note of it; while
she seemed to experience an almost childlike delight in watching it, her
eager, animated looks contrasting strongly with the utter indifference
of her companion, who, during the whole time the piece lasted, never
even moved, not even when the furious, crashing din produced by the
trumpets, cymbals, and Chinese bells sounded their loudest from the
orchestra. Of this he took no heed, but was, as far as appearances might
be trusted, enjoying soft repose and bright celestial dreams.

The ballet at length came to a close, and the curtain fell amid the
loud, unanimous plaudits of an enthusiastic and delighted audience.

Owing to the very judicious plan of dividing the two acts of the opera
with a ballet, the pauses between the performances are very short, the
singers in the opera having time to repose themselves and change their
costume, when necessary, while the dancers are executing their
pirouettes and exhibiting their graceful steps.

The overture to the second act began; and, at the first sound of the
leader's bow across his violin, Franz observed the sleeper slowly arise
and approach the Greek girl, who turned around to say a few words to
him, and then, leaning forward again on the railing of her box, she
became as absorbed as before in what was going on.

The countenance of the person who had addressed her remained so
completely in the shade, that, though Franz tried his utmost, he could
not distinguish a single feature. The curtain rose, and the attention of
Franz was attracted by the actors; and his eyes turned from the box
containing the Greek girl and her strange companion to watch the
business of the stage.

Most of my readers are aware that the second act of _Parisina_ opens
with the celebrated and effective duet in which Parisina, while
sleeping, betrays to Azzo the secret of her love for Ugo. The injured
husband goes through all the emotions of jealousy, until conviction
seizes on his mind, and then, in a frenzy of rage and indignation, he
awakens his guilty wife to tell her that he knows her guilt and to
threaten her with his vengeance.

This duet is one of the most beautiful, expressive and terrible
conceptions that has ever emanated from the fruitful pen of Donizetti.
Franz now listened to it for the third time; yet its notes, so tenderly
expressive and fearfully grand as the wretched husband and wife give
vent to their different griefs and passions, thrilled through the soul
of Franz with an effect equal to his first emotions upon hearing it.
Excited beyond his usual calm demeanor, Franz rose with the audience,
and was about to join the loud, enthusiastic applause that followed; but
suddenly his purpose was arrested, his hands fell by his sides, and the
half-uttered "bravos" expired on his lips.

The occupant of the box in which the Greek girl sat appeared to share
the universal admiration that prevailed; for he left his seat to stand
up in front, so that, his countenance being fully revealed, Franz had no
difficulty in recognizing him as the mysterious inhabitant of Monte
Cristo, and the very same person he had encountered the preceding
evening in the ruins of the Colosseum, and whose voice and figure had
seemed so familiar to him.

All doubt of his identity was now at an end; his singular host evidently
resided at Rome. The surprise and agitation occasioned by this full
confirmation of Franz's former suspicion had no doubt imparted a
corresponding expression to his features; for the countess, after gazing
with a puzzled look at his face, burst into a fit of laughter, and
begged to know what had happened.

"Countess," returned Franz, totally unheeding her raillery, "I asked you
a short time since if you knew any particulars respecting the Albanian
lady opposite; I must now beseech you to inform me who and what is her
husband?"

"Nay," answered the countess, "I know no more of him than yourself."

"Perhaps you never before noticed him?"

"What a question--so truly French! Do you not know that we Italians have
eyes only for the man we love?"

"True," replied Franz.

"All I can say is," continued the countess, taking up the _lorgnette_,
and directing it toward the box in question, "that the gentleman, whose
history I am unable to furnish, seems to me as though he had just been
dug up; he looks more like a corpse permitted by some friendly grave-
digger to quit his tomb for a while, and revisit this earth of ours,
than anything human. How ghastly pale he is!"

"Oh, he is always as colorless as you now see him," said Franz.

"Then you know him?" almost screamed the countess. "Oh, pray do, for
heaven's sake, tell us all about--is he a vampire, or a resuscitated
corpse, or what?"

"I fancy I have seen him before; and I even think he recognizes me."

"And I can well understand," said the countess, shrugging up her
beautiful shoulders, as though an involuntary shudder passed through her
veins, "that those who have once seen that man will never be likely to
forget him."

The sensation experienced by Franz was evidently not peculiar to
himself; another, and wholly uninterested person, felt the same
unaccountable awe and misgiving.

"Well." inquired Franz, after the countess had a second time directed
her _lorgnette_ at the box, "what do you think of our opposite
neighbor?"


"Why, that he is no other than Lord Ruthven himself in a living form."
This fresh allusion to Byron [*] drew a smile to Franz's countenance;
although he could but allow that if anything was likely to induce belief
in the existence of vampires, it would be the presence of such a man as
the mysterious personage before him.

"I must positively find out who and what he is," said Franz, rising from
his seat.

"No, no," cried the countess; "you must not leave me. I depend upon you
to escort me home. Oh, indeed, I cannot permit you to go."


* Scott, of course: "The son of an ill-fated sire, and the father of a
yet more unfortunate family, bore in his looks that cast of inauspicious
melancholy by which the physiognomists of that time pretended to
distinguish those who were predestined to a violent and unhappy death."-
-The Abbot, ch. xxii.

"Is it possible," whispered Franz, "that you entertain any fear?"

"I'll tell you," answered the countess. "Byron had the most perfect
belief in the existence of vampires, and even assured me that he had
seen them. The description he gave me perfectly corresponds with the
features and character of the man before us. Oh, he is the exact
personification of what I have been led to expect! The coal-black hair,
large bright, glittering eyes, in which a wild, unearthly fire seems
burning,--the same ghastly paleness. Then observe, too, that the woman
with him is altogether unlike all others of her sex. She is a foreigner-
-a stranger. Nobody knows who she is, or where she comes from. No doubt
she belongs to the same horrible race he does, and is, like himself, a
dealer in magical arts. I entreat of you not to go near him--at least
tonight; and if tomorrow your curiosity still continues as great, pursue
your researches if you will; but tonight you neither can nor shall. For
that purpose I mean to keep you all to myself." Franz protested he could
not defer his pursuit till the following day, for many reasons. "Listen
to me," said the countess, "and do not be so very headstrong. I am going
home. I have a party at my house tonight, and therefore cannot possibly
remain till the end of the opera. Now, I cannot for one instant believe
you so devoid of gallantry as to refuse a lady your escort when she even
condescends to ask you for it."

There was nothing else left for Franz to do but to take up his hat, open
the door of the box, and offer the countess his arm. It was quite
evident, by her manner, that her uneasiness was not feigned; and Franz
himself could not resist a feeling of superstitious dread--so much the
stronger in him, as it arose from a variety of corroborative
recollections, while the terror of the countess sprang from an
instinctive belief, originally created in her mind by the wild tales she
had listened to till she believed them truths. Franz could even feel her
arm tremble as he assisted her into the carriage. Upon arriving at her
hotel, Franz perceived that she had deceived him when she spoke of
expecting company; on the contrary, her own return before the appointed
hour seemed greatly to astonish the servants.
