"For his death."

"The death of your prince?"

"Yes."

"How so?"

"Because he has made his will in my favor."

"Indeed?"

"On my honor."

"For how much?"

"For five hundred thousand."

"Only that? It's little enough."

"But so it is."

"No it cannot be!"

"Are you my friend, Caderousse?"

"Yes, in life or death."

"Well, I will tell you a secret."

"What is it?"

"But remember"--

"Ah! _pardieu!_ mute as a carp."

"Well, I think"--Andrea stopped and looked around.

"You think? Do not fear; _pardieu!_ we are alone."

"I think I have discovered my father."

"Your true father?"

"Yes."

"Not old Cavalcanti?"

"No, for he has gone again; the true one, as you say."

"And that father is----"

"Well, Caderousse, it is Monte Cristo."

"Bah!"

"Yes, you understand, that explains all. He cannot acknowledge me
openly, it appears, but he does it through M. Cavalcanti, and gives him
fifty thousand francs for it."

"Fifty thousand francs for being your father? I would have done it for
half that, for twenty thousand, for fifteen thousand; why did you not
think of me, ungrateful man?"

"Did I know anything about it, when it was all done when I was down
there?"

"Ah, truly? And you say that by his will----"

"He leaves me five hundred thousand livres."

"Are you sure of it?"

"He showed it me; but that is not all--there is a codicil, as I said
just now."

"Probably."

"And in that codicil he acknowledges me."

"Oh, the good father, the brave father, the very honest father!" said
Caderousse, twirling a plate in the air between his two hands.

"Now say if I conceal anything from you?"

"No, and your confidence makes you honorable in my opinion; and your
princely father, is he rich, very rich?"

"Yes, he is that; he does not himself know the amount of his fortune."

"Is it possible?"

"It is evident enough to me, who am always at his house. The other day a
banker's clerk brought him fifty thousand francs in a portfolio about
the size of your plate; yesterday his banker brought him a hundred
thousand francs in gold." Caderousse was filled with wonder; the young
man's words sounded to him like metal, and he thought he could hear the
rushing of cascades of louis. "And you go into that house?" cried he
briskly.

"When I like."

Caderousse was thoughtful for a moment. It was easy to perceive he was
revolving some unfortunate idea in his mind. Then suddenly,--"How I
should like to see all that," cried he; "how beautiful it must be!"

"It is, in fact, magnificent," said Andrea.

"And does he not live in the Champs-Élysées?"

"Yes, No. 30."

"Ah," said Caderousse, "No. 30."

"Yes, a fine house standing alone, between a courtyard and a garden,--
you must know it."

"Possibly; but it is not the exterior I care for, it is the interior.
What beautiful furniture there must be in it!"

"Have you ever seen the Tuileries?"

"No."

"Well, it surpasses that."

"It must be worth one's while to stoop, Andrea, when that good M. Monte
Cristo lets fall his purse."

"It is not worthwhile to wait for that," said Andrea; "money is as
plentiful in that house as fruit in an orchard."

"But you should take me there one day with you."

"How can I? On what plea?"

"You are right; but you have made my mouth water. I must absolutely see
it; I shall find a way."

"No nonsense, Caderousse!"

"I will offer myself as floor-polisher."

"The rooms are all carpeted."

"Well, then, I must be contented to imagine it."

"That is the best plan, believe me."

"Try, at least, to give me an idea of what it is."

"How can I?"

"Nothing is easier. Is it large?"

"Middling."

"How is it arranged?"

"Faith, I should require pen, ink, and paper to make a plan."

"They are all here," said Caderousse, briskly. He fetched from an old
secretary desk a sheet of white paper and pen and ink. "Here," said
Caderousse, "draw me all that on the paper, my boy." Andrea took the pen
with an imperceptible smile and began. "The house, as I said, is between
the court and the garden; in this way, do you see?" Andrea drew the
garden, the court and the house.


"High walls?"

"Not more than eight or ten feet."

"That is not prudent," said Caderousse.

"In the court are orange-trees in pots, turf, and clumps of flowers."

"And no steel-traps?"

"No."

"The stables?"

"Are on either side of the gate, which you see there." And Andrea
continued his plan.

"Let us see the ground floor," said Caderousse.

"On the ground floor, dining-room, two drawing-rooms, billiard-room,
staircase in the hall, and a little back staircase."

"Windows?"

"Magnificent windows, so beautiful, so large, that I believe a man of
your size should pass through each frame."

"Why the devil have they any stairs with such windows?"

"Luxury has everything."

