
"I never returned to the country where she lived."

"To Malta?"

"Yes; Malta."

"She is, then, now at Malta?"

"I think so."

"And have you forgiven her for all she has made you suffer?"

"Her,--yes."

"But only her; do you then still hate those who separated you?"

"I hate them? Not at all; why should I?" The countess placed herself
before Monte Cristo, still holding in her hand a portion of the perfumed
grapes. "Take some," she said. "Madame, I never eat Muscatel grapes,"
replied Monte Cristo, as if the subject had not been mentioned before.
The countess dashed the grapes into the nearest thicket, with a gesture
of despair. "Inflexible man!" she murmured. Monte Cristo remained as
unmoved as if the reproach had not been addressed to him. Albert at this
moment ran in. "Oh, mother," he exclaimed, "such a misfortune has
happened!"

"What? What has happened?" asked the countess, as though awakening from
a sleep to the realities of life; "did you say a misfortune? Indeed, I
should expect misfortunes."

"M. de Villefort is here."

"Well?"

"He comes to fetch his wife and daughter."

"Why so?"

"Because Madame de Saint-Méran is just arrived in Paris, bringing the
news of M. de Saint-Méran's death, which took place on the first stage
after he left Marseilles. Madame de Villefort, who was in very good
spirits, would neither believe nor think of the misfortune, but
Mademoiselle Valentine, at the first words, guessed the whole truth,
notwithstanding all the precautions of her father; the blow struck her
like a thunderbolt, and she fell senseless."

"And how was M. de Saint-Méran related to Mademoiselle de Villefort?"
said the count.

"He was her grandfather on the mother's side. He was coming here to
hasten her marriage with Franz."

"Ah, indeed?"

"So Franz must wait. Why was not M. de Saint-Méran also grandfather to
Mademoiselle Danglars?"

"Albert, Albert," said Madame de Morcerf, in a tone of mild reproof,
"what are you saying? Ah, count, he esteems you so highly, tell him that
he has spoken amiss." And she took two or three steps forward. Monte
Cristo watched her with an air so thoughtful, and so full of
affectionate admiration, that she turned back and grasped his hand; at
the same time she seized that of her son, and joined them together.

"We are friends; are we not?" she asked.

"Oh, madame, I do not presume to call myself your friend, but at all
times I am your most respectful servant." The countess left with an
indescribable pang in her heart, and before she had taken ten steps the
count saw her raise her handkerchief to her eyes. "Do not my mother and
you agree?" asked Albert, astonished.

"On the contrary," replied the count, "did you not hear her declare that
we were friends?" They re-entered the drawing-room, which Valentine and
Madame de Villefort had just quitted. It is perhaps needless to add that
Morrel departed almost at the same time.



Chapter 72. Madame de Saint-Méran

A gloomy scene had indeed just passed at the house of M. de Villefort.
After the ladies had departed for the ball, whither all the entreaties
of Madame de Villefort had failed in persuading him to accompany them,
the procureur had shut himself up in his study, according to his custom,
with a heap of papers calculated to alarm anyone else, but which
generally scarcely satisfied his inordinate desires. But this time the
papers were a mere matter of form. Villefort had secluded himself, not
to study, but to reflect; and with the door locked and orders given that
he should not be disturbed excepting for important business, he sat down
in his armchair and began to ponder over the events, the remembrance of
which had during the last eight days filled his mind with so many gloomy
thoughts and bitter recollections. Then, instead of plunging into the
mass of documents piled before him, he opened the drawer of his desk,
touched a spring, and drew out a parcel of cherished memoranda, amongst
which he had carefully arranged, in characters only known to himself,
the names of all those who, either in his political career, in money
matters, at the bar, or in his mysterious love affairs, had become his
enemies.

Their number was formidable, now that he had begun to fear, and yet
these names, powerful though they were, had often caused him to smile
with the same kind of satisfaction experienced by a traveller who from
the summit of a mountain beholds at his feet the craggy eminences, the
almost impassable paths, and the fearful chasms, through which he has so
perilously climbed. When he had run over all these names in his memory,
again read and studied them, commenting meanwhile upon his lists, he
shook his head.

"No," he murmured, "none of my enemies would have waited so patiently
and laboriously for so long a space of time, that they might now come
and crush me with this secret. Sometimes, as Hamlet says--


'Foul deeds will rise, Though all the earth o'erwhelm them, to men's
eyes;'

but, like a phosphoric light, they rise but to mislead. The story has
been told by the Corsican to some priest, who in his turn has repeated
it. M. de Monte Cristo may have heard it, and to enlighten himself--but
why should he wish to enlighten himself upon the subject?" asked
Villefort, after a moment's reflection, "what interest can this M. de
Monte Cristo or M. Zaccone,--son of a shipowner of Malta, discoverer of
a mine in Thessaly, now visiting Paris for the first time,--what
interest, I say, can he take in discovering a gloomy, mysterious, and
useless fact like this? However, among all the incoherent details given
to me by the Abbé Busoni and by Lord Wilmore, by that friend and that
enemy, one thing appears certain and clear in my opinion--that in no
period, in no case, in no circumstance, could there have been any
contact between him and me."

But Villefort uttered words which even he himself did not believe. He
dreaded not so much the revelation, for he could reply to or deny its
truth;--he cared little for that _mene, mene, tekel upharsin_, which
appeared suddenly in letters of blood upon the wall;--but what he was
really anxious for was to discover whose hand had traced them. While he
was endeavoring to calm his fears,--and instead of dwelling upon the
political future that had so often been the subject of his ambitious
dreams, was imagining a future limited to the enjoyments of home, in
fear of awakening the enemy that had so long slept,--the noise of a
carriage sounded in the yard, then he heard the steps of an aged person
ascending the stairs, followed by tears and lamentations, such as
servants always give vent to when they wish to appear interested in
their master's grief. He drew back the bolt of his door, and almost
directly an old lady entered, unannounced, carrying her shawl on her
arm, and her bonnet in her hand. The white hair was thrown back from her
yellow forehead, and her eyes, already sunken by the furrows of age, now
almost disappeared beneath the eyelids swollen with grief. "Oh, sir,"
she said; "oh, sir, what a misfortune! I shall die of it; oh, yes, I
shall certainly die of it!"

And then, falling upon the chair nearest the door, she burst into a
paroxysm of sobs. The servants, standing in the doorway, not daring to
approach nearer, were looking at Noirtier's old servant, who had heard
the noise from his master's room, and run there also, remaining behind
the others. Villefort rose, and ran towards his mother-in-law, for it
was she.

"Why, what can have happened?" he exclaimed, "what has thus disturbed
you? Is M. de Saint-Méran with you?"

"M. de Saint-Méran is dead," answered the old marchioness, without
preface and without expression; she appeared to be stupefied. Villefort
drew back, and clasping his hands together, exclaimed--"Dead!--so
suddenly?"

"A week ago," continued Madame de Saint-Méran, "we went out together in
the carriage after dinner. M. de Saint-Méran had been unwell for some
days; still, the idea of seeing our dear Valentine again inspired him
with courage, and notwithstanding his illness he would leave. At six
leagues from Marseilles, after having eaten some of the lozenges he is
accustomed to take, he fell into such a deep sleep, that it appeared to
me unnatural; still I hesitated to wake him, although I fancied that his
face was flushed, and that the veins of his temples throbbed more
violently than usual. However, as it became dark, and I could no longer
see, I fell asleep; I was soon aroused by a piercing shriek, as from a
person suffering in his dreams, and he suddenly threw his head back
violently. I called the valet, I stopped the postilion, I spoke to M. de
Saint-Méran, I applied my smelling-salts; but all was over, and I
arrived at Aix by the side of a corpse." Villefort stood with his mouth
half open, quite stupefied.

"Of course you sent for a doctor?"

"Immediately; but, as I have told you, it was too late."

"Yes; but then he could tell of what complaint the poor marquis had
died."

"Oh, yes, sir, he told me; it appears to have been an apoplectic
stroke."

"And what did you do then?"

"M. de Saint-Méran had always expressed a desire, in case his death
happened during his absence from Paris, that his body might be brought
to the family vault. I had him put into a leaden coffin, and I am
preceding him by a few days."

