desire to spite his family, who did not allow him as much money as he
liked to spend; but that on his arrival at Leghorn he had come into
possession of a large fortune, left him by an uncle, whose sole heir he
was. The superior education of Dantès gave an air of such extreme
probability to this statement that it never once occurred to Jacopo to
doubt its accuracy. The term for which Edmond had engaged to serve on
board _La Jeune Amélie_ having expired, Dantès took leave of the
captain, who at first tried all his powers of persuasion to induce him
to remain as one of the crew, but having been told the history of the
legacy, he ceased to importune him further. The following morning Jacopo
set sail for Marseilles, with directions from Dantès to join him at the
Island of Monte Cristo.

Having seen Jacopo fairly out of the harbor, Dantès proceeded to make
his final adieus on board _La Jeune Amélie_, distributing so liberal a
gratuity among her crew as to secure for him the good wishes of all, and
expressions of cordial interest in all that concerned him. To the
captain he promised to write when he had made up his mind as to his
future plans. Then Dantès departed for Genoa.

At the moment of his arrival a small yacht was under trial in the bay;
this yacht had been built by order of an Englishman, who, having heard
that the Genoese excelled all other builders along the shores of the
Mediterranean in the construction of fast-sailing vessels, was desirous
of possessing a specimen of their skill; the price agreed upon between
the Englishman and the Genoese builder was forty thousand francs.
Dantès, struck with the beauty and capability of the little vessel,
applied to its owner to transfer it to him, offering sixty thousand
francs, upon condition that he should be allowed to take immediate
possession. The proposal was too advantageous to be refused, the more so
as the person for whom the yacht was intended had gone upon a tour
through Switzerland, and was not expected back in less than three weeks
or a month, by which time the builder reckoned upon being able to
complete another. A bargain was therefore struck. Dantès led the owner
of the yacht to the dwelling of a Jew; retired with the latter for a few
minutes to a small back parlor, and upon their return the Jew counted
out to the shipbuilder the sum of sixty thousand francs in bright gold
pieces.

The delighted builder then offered his services in providing a suitable
crew for the little vessel, but this Dantès declined with many thanks,
saying he was accustomed to cruise about quite alone, and his principal
pleasure consisted in managing his yacht himself; the only thing the
builder could oblige him in would be to contrive a sort of secret closet
in the cabin at his bed's head, the closet to contain three divisions,
so constructed as to be concealed from all but himself. The builder
cheerfully undertook the commission, and promised to have these secret
places completed by the next day, Dantès furnishing the dimensions and
plan in accordance with which they were to be constructed.


Two hours afterward Dantès sailed from the port of Genoa, under the
inspection of an immense crowd drawn together by curiosity to see the
rich Spanish nobleman who preferred managing his own yacht. But their
wonder was soon changed to admiration at seeing the perfect skill with
which Dantès handled the helm. The boat, indeed, seemed to be animated
with almost human intelligence, so promptly did it obey the slightest
touch; and Dantès required but a short trial of his beautiful craft to
acknowledge that the Genoese had not without reason attained their high
reputation in the art of shipbuilding. The spectators followed the
little vessel with their eyes as long as it remained visible; they then
turned their conjectures upon her probable destination. Some insisted
she was making for Corsica, others the Island of Elba; bets were offered
to any amount that she was bound for Spain; while Africa was positively
reported by many persons as her intended course; but no one thought of
Monte Cristo. Yet thither it was that Dantès guided his vessel, and at
Monte Cristo he arrived at the close of the second day; his boat had
proved herself a first-class sailor, and had come the distance from
Genoa in thirty-five hours. Dantès had carefully noted the general
appearance of the shore, and, instead of landing at the usual place, he
dropped anchor in the little creek. The island was utterly deserted, and
bore no evidence of having been visited since he went away; his treasure
was just as he had left it. Early on the following morning he commenced
the removal of his riches, and ere nightfall the whole of his immense
wealth was safely deposited in the compartments of the secret locker.

A week passed by. Dantès employed it in manœuvring his yacht round the
island, studying it as a skilful horseman would the animal he destined
for some important service, till at the end of that time he was
perfectly conversant with its good and bad qualities. The former Dantès
proposed to augment, the latter to remedy.

Upon the eighth day he discerned a small vessel under full sail
approaching Monte Cristo. As it drew near, he recognized it as the boat
he had given to Jacopo. He immediately signalled it. His signal was
returned, and in two hours afterwards the new-comer lay at anchor beside
the yacht. A mournful answer awaited each of Edmond's eager inquiries as
to the information Jacopo had obtained. Old Dantès was dead, and
Mercédès had disappeared. Dantès listened to these melancholy tidings
with outward calmness; but, leaping lightly ashore, he signified his
desire to be quite alone. In a couple of hours he returned. Two of the
men from Jacopo's boat came on board the yacht to assist in navigating
it, and he gave orders that she should be steered direct to Marseilles.
For his father's death he was in some manner prepared; but he knew not
how to account for the mysterious disappearance of Mercédès.

Without divulging his secret, Dantès could not give sufficiently clear
instructions to an agent. There were, besides, other particulars he was
desirous of ascertaining, and those were of a nature he alone could
investigate in a manner satisfactory to himself. His looking-glass had
assured him, during his stay at Leghorn, that he ran no risk of
recognition; moreover, he had now the means of adopting any disguise he
thought proper. One fine morning, then, his yacht, followed by the
little fishing-boat, boldly entered the port of Marseilles, and anchored
exactly opposite the spot from whence, on the never-to-be-forgotten
night of his departure for the Château d'If, he had been put on board
the boat destined to convey him thither. Still Dantès could not view
without a shudder the approach of a gendarme who accompanied the
officers deputed to demand his bill of health ere the yacht was
permitted to hold communication with the shore; but with that perfect
self-possession he had acquired during his acquaintance with Faria,
Dantès coolly presented an English passport he had obtained from
Leghorn, and as this gave him a standing which a French passport would
not have afforded, he was informed that there existed no obstacle to his
immediate debarkation.


The first person to attract the attention of Dantès, as he landed on the
Canebière, was one of the crew belonging to the _Pharaon_. Edmond
welcomed the meeting with this fellow--who had been one of his own
sailors--as a sure means of testing the extent of the change which time
had worked in his own appearance. Going straight towards him, he
propounded a variety of questions on different subjects, carefully
watching the man's countenance as he did so; but not a word or look
implied that he had the slightest idea of ever having seen before the
person with whom he was then conversing. Giving the sailor a piece of
money in return for his civility, Dantès proceeded onwards; but ere he
had gone many steps he heard the man loudly calling him to stop. Dantès
instantly turned to meet him. "I beg your pardon, sir," said the honest
fellow, in almost breathless haste, "but I believe you made a mistake;
you intended to give me a two-franc piece, and see, you gave me a double
Napoleon."

"Thank you, my good friend. I see that I have made a trifling mistake,
as you say; but by way of rewarding your honesty I give you another
double Napoleon, that you may drink to my health, and be able to ask
your messmates to join you."

So extreme was the surprise of the sailor, that he was unable even to
thank Edmond, whose receding figure he continued to gaze after in
speechless astonishment. "Some nabob from India," was his comment.

Dantès, meanwhile, went on his way. Each step he trod oppressed his
heart with fresh emotion; his first and most indelible recollections
were there; not a tree, not a street, that he passed but seemed filled
with dear and cherished memories. And thus he proceeded onwards till he
arrived at the end of the Rue de Noailles, from whence a full view of
the Allées de Meillan was obtained. At this spot, so pregnant with fond
and filial remembrances, his heart beat almost to bursting, his knees
tottered under him, a mist floated over his sight, and had he not clung
for support to one of the trees, he would inevitably have fallen to the
ground and been crushed beneath the many vehicles continually passing
there. Recovering himself, however, he wiped the perspiration from his
brows, and stopped not again till he found himself at the door of the
house in which his father had lived.

The nasturtiums and other plants, which his father had delighted to
train before his window, had all disappeared from the upper part of the
house. Leaning against the tree, he gazed thoughtfully for a time at the
upper stories of the shabby little house. Then he advanced to the door,
and asked whether there were any rooms to be let. Though answered in the
negative, he begged so earnestly to be permitted to visit those on the
fifth floor, that, in despite of the oft-repeated assurance of the
_concierge_ that they were occupied, Dantès succeeded in inducing the
man to go up to the tenants, and ask permission for a gentleman to be
allowed to look at them.

The tenants of the humble lodging were a young couple who had been
scarcely married a week; and seeing them, Dantès sighed heavily. Nothing
in the two small chambers forming the apartments remained as it had been
in the time of the elder Dantès; the very paper was different, while the
articles of antiquated furniture with which the rooms had been filled in
Edmond's time had all disappeared; the four walls alone remained as he
had left them. The bed belonging to the present occupants was placed as
the former owner of the chamber had been accustomed to have his; and, in
spite of his efforts to prevent it, the eyes of Edmond were suffused in
tears as he reflected that on that spot the old man had breathed his
last, vainly calling for his son. The young couple gazed with
astonishment at the sight of their visitor's emotion, and wondered to
see the large tears silently chasing each other down his otherwise stern
and immovable features; but they felt the sacredness of his grief, and
kindly refrained from questioning him as to its cause, while, with
instinctive delicacy, they left him to indulge his sorrow alone.


When he withdrew from the scene of his painful recollections, they both
accompanied him downstairs, reiterating their hope that he would come
again whenever he pleased, and assuring him that their poor dwelling
would ever be open to him. As Edmond passed the door on the fourth
floor, he paused to inquire whether Caderousse the tailor still dwelt
there; but he received, for reply, that the person in question had got
into difficulties, and at the present time kept a small inn on the route
from Bellegarde to Beaucaire.

Having obtained the address of the person to whom the house in the
Allées de Meillan belonged, Dantès next proceeded thither, and, under
the name of Lord Wilmore (the name and title inscribed on his passport),
purchased the small dwelling for the sum of twenty-five thousand francs,
at least ten thousand more than it was worth; but had its owner asked
half a million, it would unhesitatingly have been given. The very same
