the arrival of M. d'Epinay, and the following day the contract will be
signed." A deep sigh escaped the young man, who gazed long and
mournfully at her he loved. "Alas," replied he, "it is dreadful thus to
hear my condemnation from your own lips. The sentence is passed, and, in
a few hours, will be executed; it must be so, and I will not endeavor to
prevent it. But, since you say nothing remains but for M. d'Epinay to
arrive that the contract may be signed, and the following day you will
be his, tomorrow you will be engaged to M. d'Epinay, for he came this
morning to Paris." Valentine uttered a cry.

"I was at the house of Monte Cristo an hour since," said Morrel; "we
were speaking, he of the sorrow your family had experienced, and I of
your grief, when a carriage rolled into the courtyard. Never, till then,
had I placed any confidence in presentiments, but now I cannot help
believing them, Valentine. At the sound of that carriage I shuddered;
soon I heard steps on the staircase, which terrified me as much as the
footsteps of the commander did Don Juan. The door at last opened; Albert
de Morcerf entered first, and I began to hope my fears were vain, when,
after him, another young man advanced, and the count exclaimed--'Ah,
here is the Baron Franz d'Epinay!' I summoned all my strength and
courage to my support. Perhaps I turned pale and trembled, but certainly
I smiled; and five minutes after I left, without having heard one word
that had passed."

"Poor Maximilian!" murmured Valentine.

"Valentine, the time has arrived when you must answer me. And remember
my life depends on your answer. What do you intend doing?" Valentine
held down her head; she was overwhelmed.

"Listen," said Morrel; "it is not the first time you have contemplated
our present position, which is a serious and urgent one; I do not think
it is a moment to give way to useless sorrow; leave that for those who
like to suffer at their leisure and indulge their grief in secret. There
are such in the world, and God will doubtless reward them in heaven for
their resignation on earth, but those who mean to contend must not lose
one precious moment, but must return immediately the blow which fortune
strikes. Do you intend to struggle against our ill-fortune? Tell me,
Valentine for it is that I came to know."

Valentine trembled, and looked at him with amazement. The idea of
resisting her father, her grandmother, and all the family, had never
occurred to her. "What do you say, Maximilian?" asked Valentine. "What
do you mean by a struggle? Oh, it would be a sacrilege. What? I resist
my father's order, and my dying grandmother's wish? Impossible!" Morrel
started. "You are too noble not to understand me, and you understand me
so well that you already yield, dear Maximilian. No, no; I shall need
all my strength to struggle with myself and support my grief in secret,
as you say. But to grieve my father--to disturb my grandmother's last
moments--never!"

"You are right," said Morrel, calmly.

"In what a tone you speak!" cried Valentine.

"I speak as one who admires you, mademoiselle."

"Mademoiselle," cried Valentine; "mademoiselle! Oh, selfish man,--he
sees me in despair, and pretends he cannot understand me!"

"You mistake--I understand you perfectly. You will not oppose M.
Villefort, you will not displease the marchioness, and tomorrow you will
sign the contract which will bind you to your husband."

"But, _mon Dieu!_ tell me, how can I do otherwise?"

"Do not appeal to me, mademoiselle; I shall be a bad judge in such a
case; my selfishness will blind me," replied Morrel, whose low voice and
clenched hands announced his growing desperation.

"What would you have proposed, Maximilian, had you found me willing to
accede?"

"It is not for me to say."

"You are wrong; you must advise me what to do."

"Do you seriously ask my advice, Valentine?"

"Certainly, dear Maximilian, for if it is good, I will follow it; you
know my devotion to you."

"Valentine," said Morrel pushing aside a loose plank, "give me your hand
in token of forgiveness of my anger; my senses are confused, and during
the last hour the most extravagant thoughts have passed through my
brain. Oh, if you refuse my advice----"

"What do you advise?" said Valentine, raising her eyes to heaven and
sighing. "I am free," replied Maximilian, "and rich enough to support
you. I swear to make you my lawful wife before my lips even shall have
approached your forehead."

"You make me tremble!" said the young girl.

"Follow me," said Morrel; "I will take you to my sister, who is worthy
also to be yours. We will embark for Algiers, for England, for America,
or, if you prefer it, retire to the country and only return to Paris
when our friends have reconciled your family." Valentine shook her head.
"I feared it, Maximilian," said she; "it is the counsel of a madman, and
I should be more mad than you, did I not stop you at once with the word
'Impossible, Morrel, impossible!'"

"You will then submit to what fate decrees for you without even
attempting to contend with it?" said Morrel sorrowfully.

"Yes,--if I die!"

"Well, Valentine," resumed Maximilian, "I can only say again that you
are right. Truly, it is I who am mad, and you prove to me that passion
blinds the most well-meaning. I appreciate your calm reasoning. It is
then understood that tomorrow you will be irrevocably promised to M.
Franz d'Epinay, not only by that theatrical formality invented to
heighten the effect of a comedy called the signature of the contract,
but your own will?"

"Again you drive me to despair, Maximilian," said Valentine, "again you
plunge the dagger into the wound! What would you do, tell me, if your
sister listened to such a proposition?"

"Mademoiselle," replied Morrel with a bitter smile, "I am selfish--you
have already said so--and as a selfish man I think not of what others
would do in my situation, but of what I intend doing myself. I think
only that I have known you not a whole year. From the day I first saw
you, all my hopes of happiness have been in securing your affection. One
day you acknowledged that you loved me, and since that day my hope of
future happiness has rested on obtaining you, for to gain you would be
life to me. Now, I think no more; I say only that fortune has turned
against me--I had thought to gain heaven, and now I have lost it. It is
an every-day occurrence for a gambler to lose not only what he possesses
but also what he has not." Morrel pronounced these words with perfect
calmness; Valentine looked at him a moment with her large, scrutinizing
eyes, endeavoring not to let Morrel discover the grief which struggled
in her heart. "But, in a word, what are you going to do?" asked she.

"I am going to have the honor of taking my leave of you, mademoiselle,
solemnly assuring you that I wish your life may be so calm, so happy,
and so fully occupied, that there may be no place for me even in your
memory."

"Oh!" murmured Valentine.

"Adieu, Valentine, adieu!" said Morrel, bowing.

"Where are you going?" cried the young girl, extending her hand through
the opening, and seizing Maximilian by his coat, for she understood from
her own agitated feelings that her lover's calmness could not be real;
"where are you going?"

"I am going, that I may not bring fresh trouble into your family: and to
set an example which every honest and devoted man, situated as I am, may
follow."

"Before you leave me, tell me what you are going to do, Maximilian." The
young man smiled sorrowfully. "Speak, speak!" said Valentine; "I entreat
you."

"Has your resolution changed, Valentine?"

"It cannot change, unhappy man; you know it must not!" cried the young
girl. "Then adieu, Valentine!" Valentine shook the gate with a strength
of which she could not have been supposed to be possessed, as Morrel was
going away, and passing both her hands through the opening, she clasped
and wrung them. "I must know what you mean to do!" said she. "Where are
you going?"

"Oh, fear not," said Maximilian, stopping at a short distance, "I do not
intend to render another man responsible for the rigorous fate reserved
for me. Another might threaten to seek M. Franz, to provoke him, and to
fight with him; all that would be folly. What has M. Franz to do with
it? He saw me this morning for the first time, and has already forgotten
he has seen me. He did not even know I existed when it was arranged by
your two families that you should be united. I have no enmity against M.
Franz, and promise you the punishment shall not fall on him."

"On whom, then!--on me?"

"On you? Valentine! Oh, heaven forbid! Woman is sacred; the woman one
loves is holy."

"On yourself, then, unhappy man; on yourself?"

"I am the only guilty person, am I not?" said Maximilian.

"Maximilian!" said Valentine, "Maximilian, come back, I entreat you!" He
drew near with his sweet smile, and but for his paleness one might have
thought him in his usual happy mood. "Listen, my dear, my adored
Valentine," said he in his melodious and grave tone; "those who, like
us, have never had a thought for which we need blush before the world,
such may read each other's hearts. I never was romantic, and am no
melancholy hero. I imitate neither Manfred nor Anthony; but without
words, protestations, or vows, my life has entwined itself with yours;
you leave me, and you are right in doing so,--I repeat it, you are
right; but in losing you, I lose my life.

"The moment you leave me, Valentine, I am alone in the world. My sister
is happily married; her husband is only my brother-in-law, that is, a
man whom the ties of social life alone attach to me; no one then longer
needs my useless life. This is what I shall do; I will wait until the
very moment you are married, for I will not lose the shadow of one of
those unexpected chances which are sometimes reserved for us, since M.
