Cristo was eager to ascertain the strength and number of his enemies.

The window whence the noise proceeded was opposite the opening by which
the count could see into the dressing-room. He fixed his eyes on that
window--he distinguished a shadow in the darkness; then one of the panes
became quite opaque, as if a sheet of paper were stuck on the outside,
then the square cracked without falling. Through the opening an arm was
passed to find the fastening, then a second; the window turned on its
hinges, and a man entered. He was alone.

"That's a daring rascal," whispered the count.

At that moment Ali touched him slightly on the shoulder. He turned; Ali
pointed to the window of the room in which they were, facing the street.
"I see!" said he, "there are two of them; one does the work while the
other stands guard." He made a sign to Ali not to lose sight of the man
in the street, and turned to the one in the dressing-room.

The glass-cutter had entered, and was feeling his way, his arms
stretched out before him. At last he appeared to have made himself
familiar with his surroundings. There were two doors; he bolted them
both.

When he drew near to the bedroom door, Monte Cristo expected that he was
coming in, and raised one of his pistols; but he simply heard the sound
of the bolts sliding in their copper rings. It was only a precaution.
The nocturnal visitor, ignorant of the fact that the count had removed
the staples, might now think himself at home, and pursue his purpose
with full security. Alone and free to act as he wished, the man then
drew from his pocket something which the count could not discern, placed
it on a stand, then went straight to the secretary desk, felt the lock,
and contrary to his expectation found that the key was missing. But the
glass-cutter was a prudent man who had provided for all emergencies. The
count soon heard the rattling of a bunch of skeleton keys, such as the
locksmith brings when called to force a lock, and which thieves call
nightingales, doubtless from the music of their nightly song when they
grind against the bolt. "Ah, ha," whispered Monte Cristo with a smile of
disappointment, "he is only a thief."

But the man in the dark could not find the right key. He reached the
instrument he had placed on the stand, touched a spring, and immediately
a pale light, just bright enough to render objects distinct, was
reflected on his hands and countenance. "By heavens," exclaimed Monte
Cristo, starting back, "it is----"


Ali raised his hatchet. "Don't stir," whispered Monte Cristo, "and put
down your hatchet; we shall require no arms." Then he added some words
in a low tone, for the exclamation which surprise had drawn from the
count, faint as it had been, had startled the man who remained in the
pose of the old knife-grinder. It was an order the count had just given,
for immediately Ali went noiselessly, and returned, bearing a black
dress and a three-cornered hat. Meanwhile Monte Cristo had rapidly taken
off his great-coat, waistcoat, and shirt, and one might distinguish by
the glimmering through the open panel that he wore a pliant tunic of
steel mail, of which the last in France, where daggers are no longer
dreaded, was worn by King Louis XVI., who feared the dagger at his
breast, and whose head was cleft with a hatchet. The tunic soon
disappeared under a long cassock, as did his hair under a priest's wig;
the three-cornered hat over this effectually transformed the count into
an abbé.

The man, hearing nothing more, stood erect, and while Monte Cristo was
completing his disguise had advanced straight to the secretary desk,
whose lock was beginning to crack under his nightingale.

"Try again," whispered the count, who depended on the secret spring,
which was unknown to the picklock, clever as he might be--"try again,
you have a few minutes' work there." And he advanced to the window. The
man whom he had seen seated on a fence had got down, and was still
pacing the street; but, strange as it appeared, he cared not for those
who might pass from the avenue of the Champs-Élysées or by the Faubourg
Saint-Honoré; his attention was engrossed with what was passing at the
count's, and his only aim appeared to be to discern every movement in
the dressing-room.

Monte Cristo suddenly struck his finger on his forehead and a smile
passed over his lips; then drawing near to Ali, he whispered,--

"Remain here, concealed in the dark, and whatever noise you hear,
whatever passes, only come in or show yourself if I call you." Ali bowed
in token of strict obedience. Monte Cristo then drew a lighted taper
from a closet, and when the thief was deeply engaged with his lock,
silently opened the door, taking care that the light should shine
directly on his face. The door opened so quietly that the thief heard no
sound; but, to his astonishment, the room was suddenly illuminated. He
turned.

"Ah, good-evening, my dear M. Caderousse," said Monte Cristo; "what are
you doing here, at such an hour?"


"The Abbé Busoni!" exclaimed Caderousse; and, not knowing how this
strange apparition could have entered when he had bolted the doors, he
let fall his bunch of keys, and remained motionless and stupefied. The
count placed himself between Caderousse and the window, thus cutting off
from the thief his only chance of retreat. "The Abbé Busoni!" repeated
Caderousse, fixing his haggard gaze on the count.

"Yes, undoubtedly, the Abbé Busoni himself," replied Monte Cristo. "And
I am very glad you recognize me, dear M. Caderousse; it proves you have
a good memory, for it must be about ten years since we last met." This
calmness of Busoni, combined with his irony and boldness, staggered
Caderousse.

"The abbé, the abbé!" murmured he, clenching his fists, and his teeth
chattering.

"So you would rob the Count of Monte Cristo?" continued the false abbé.

"Reverend sir," murmured Caderousse, seeking to regain the window, which
the count pitilessly blocked--"reverend sir, I don't know--believe me--I
take my oath----"

"A pane of glass out," continued the count, "a dark lantern, a bunch of
false keys, a secretary desk half forced--it is tolerably evident----"

Caderousse was choking; he looked around for some corner to hide in,
some way of escape.

"Come, come," continued the count, "I see you are still the same,--an
assassin."

"Reverend sir, since you know everything, you know it was not I--it was
La Carconte; that was proved at the trial, since I was only condemned to
the galleys."

"Is your time, then, expired, since I find you in a fair way to return
there?"

"No, reverend sir; I have been liberated by someone."

"That someone has done society a great kindness."

"Ah," said Caderousse, "I had promised----"

"And you are breaking your promise!" interrupted Monte Cristo.

"Alas, yes!" said Caderousse very uneasily.

"A bad relapse, that will lead you, if I mistake not, to the Place de
Grève. So much the worse, so much the worse--_diavolo!_ as they say in
my country."

"Reverend sir, I am impelled----"

"Every criminal says the same thing."

"Poverty----"

"Pshaw!" said Busoni disdainfully; "poverty may make a man beg, steal a
loaf of bread at a baker's door, but not cause him to open a secretary
desk in a house supposed to be inhabited. And when the jeweller Johannes
had just paid you 45,000 francs for the diamond I had given you, and you
killed him to get the diamond and the money both, was that also
poverty?"

"Pardon, reverend sir," said Caderousse; "you have saved my life once,
save me again!"

"That is but poor encouragement."

"Are you alone, reverend sir, or have you there soldiers ready to seize
me?"

"I am alone," said the abbé, "and I will again have pity on you, and
will let you escape, at the risk of the fresh miseries my weakness may
lead to, if you tell me the truth."

"Ah, reverend sir," cried Caderousse, clasping his hands, and drawing
nearer to Monte Cristo, "I may indeed say you are my deliverer!"

"You mean to say you have been freed from confinement?"

"Yes, that is true, reverend sir."

"Who was your liberator?"

"An Englishman."

"What was his name?"

"Lord Wilmore."

"I know him; I shall know if you lie."

"Ah, reverend sir, I tell you the simple truth."

"Was this Englishman protecting you?"

"No, not me, but a young Corsican, my companion."

"What was this young Corsican's name?"

"Benedetto."

"Is that his Christian name?"

"He had no other; he was a foundling."

