"Nothing is impossible," gravely replied Monte Cristo; and taking leave
of Albert, he returned into the house, and struck the gong three times.
Bertuccio appeared. "Monsieur Bertuccio, you understand that I intend
entertaining company on Saturday at Auteuil." Bertuccio slightly
started. "I shall require your services to see that all be properly
arranged. It is a beautiful house, or at all events may be made so."

"There must be a good deal done before it can deserve that title, your
excellency, for the tapestried hangings are very old."

"Let them all be taken away and changed, then, with the exception of the
sleeping-chamber which is hung with red damask; you will leave that
exactly as it is." Bertuccio bowed. "You will not touch the garden
either; as to the yard, you may do what you please with it; I should
prefer that being altered beyond all recognition."

"I will do everything in my power to carry out your wishes, your
excellency. I should be glad, however, to receive your excellency's
commands concerning the dinner."

"Really, my dear M. Bertuccio," said the count, "since you have been in
Paris, you have become quite nervous, and apparently out of your
element; you no longer seem to understand me."

"But surely your excellency will be so good as to inform me whom you are
expecting to receive?"

"I do not yet know myself, neither is it necessary that you should do
so. 'Lucullus dines with Lucullus,' that is quite sufficient." Bertuccio
bowed, and left the room.



Chapter 55. Major Cavalcanti

Both the count and Baptistin had told the truth when they announced to
Morcerf the proposed visit of the major, which had served Monte Cristo
as a pretext for declining Albert's invitation. Seven o'clock had just
struck, and M. Bertuccio, according to the command which had been given
him, had two hours before left for Auteuil, when a cab stopped at the
door, and after depositing its occupant at the gate, immediately hurried
away, as if ashamed of its employment. The visitor was about fifty-two
years of age, dressed in one of the green surtouts, ornamented with
black frogs, which have so long maintained their popularity all over
Europe. He wore trousers of blue cloth, boots tolerably clean, but not
of the brightest polish, and a little too thick in the soles, buckskin
gloves, a hat somewhat resembling in shape those usually worn by the
gendarmes, and a black cravat striped with white, which, if the
proprietor had not worn it of his own free will, might have passed for a
halter, so much did it resemble one. Such was the picturesque costume of
the person who rang at the gate, and demanded if it was not at No. 30 in
the Avenue des Champs-Élysées that the Count of Monte Cristo lived, and
who, being answered by the porter in the affirmative, entered, closed
the gate after him, and began to ascend the steps.

The small and angular head of this man, his white hair and thick gray
moustaches, caused him to be easily recognized by Baptistin, who had
received an exact description of the expected visitor, and who was
awaiting him in the hall. Therefore, scarcely had the stranger time to
pronounce his name before the count was apprised of his arrival. He was
ushered into a simple and elegant drawing-room, and the count rose to
meet him with a smiling air. "Ah, my dear sir, you are most welcome; I
was expecting you."

"Indeed," said the Italian, "was your excellency then aware of my
visit?"

"Yes; I had been told that I should see you today at seven o'clock."

"Then you have received full information concerning my arrival?"

"Of course."

"Ah, so much the better, I feared this little precaution might have been
forgotten."

"What precaution?"

"That of informing you beforehand of my coming."

"Oh, no, it has not."


"But you are sure you are not mistaken."

"Very sure."

"It really was I whom your excellency expected at seven o'clock this
evening?"

"I will prove it to you beyond a doubt."

"Oh, no, never mind that," said the Italian; "it is not worth the
trouble."

"Yes, yes," said Monte Cristo. His visitor appeared slightly uneasy.
"Let me see," said the count; "are you not the Marquis Bartolomeo
Cavalcanti?"

"Bartolomeo Cavalcanti," joyfully replied the Italian; "yes, I am really
he."

"Ex-major in the Austrian service?"

"Was I a major?" timidly asked the old soldier.

"Yes," said Monte Cristo "you were a major; that is the title the French
give to the post which you filled in Italy."

"Very good," said the major, "I do not demand more, you understand----"

"Your visit here today is not of your own suggestion, is it?" said Monte
Cristo.

"No, certainly not."

"You were sent by some other person?"

"Yes."

"By the excellent Abbé Busoni?"

"Exactly so," said the delighted major.

"And you have a letter?"

"Yes, there it is."

"Give it to me, then;" and Monte Cristo took the letter, which he opened
and read. The major looked at the count with his large staring eyes, and
then took a survey of the apartment, but his gaze almost immediately
reverted to the proprietor of the room.

"Yes, yes, I see. 'Major Cavalcanti, a worthy patrician of Lucca, a
descendant of the Cavalcanti of Florence,'" continued Monte Cristo,
reading aloud, "'possessing an income of half a million.'"

Monte Cristo raised his eyes from the paper, and bowed. "Half a
million," said he, "magnificent!"

"Half a million, is it?" said the major.

"Yes, in so many words; and it must be so, for the abbé knows correctly
the amount of all the largest fortunes in Europe."

"Be it half a million, then; but on my word of honor, I had no idea that
it was so much."

"Because you are robbed by your steward. You must make some reformation
in that quarter."

"You have opened my eyes," said the Italian gravely; "I will show the
gentlemen the door." Monte Cristo resumed the perusal of the letter:--

"'And who only needs one thing more to make him happy.'"

"Yes, indeed but one!" said the major with a sigh.

"'Which is to recover a lost and adored son.'"

"A lost and adored son!"

"'Stolen away in his infancy, either by an enemy of his noble family or
by the gypsies.'"

"At the age of five years!" said the major with a deep sigh, and raising
his eye to heaven.

"Unhappy father," said Monte Cristo. The count continued:--

"'I have given him renewed life and hope, in the assurance that you have
the power of restoring the son whom he has vainly sought for fifteen
years.'"

The major looked at the count with an indescribable expression of
anxiety.

"I have the power of so doing," said Monte Cristo. The major recovered
his self-possession.

"So, then," said he, "the letter was true to the end?"

"Did you doubt it, my dear Monsieur Bartolomeo?"

"No, indeed; certainly not; a good man, a man holding religious office,
as does the Abbé Busoni, could not condescend to deceive or play off a
joke; but your excellency has not read all."

"Ah, true," said Monte Cristo "there is a postscript."

"Yes, yes," repeated the major, "yes--there--is--a--postscript."

"'In order to save Major Cavalcanti the trouble of drawing on his
banker, I send him a draft for 2,000 francs to defray his travelling
expenses, and credit on you for the further sum of 48,000 francs, which
you still owe me.'"

The major awaited the conclusion of the postscript, apparently with
great anxiety.

