Carlini threw himself, sobbing like a child, into the arms of his
mistress's father. These were the first tears the man of blood had ever
wept.

"'Now,' said the old man, 'aid me to bury my child.' Carlini fetched two
pickaxes; and the father and the lover began to dig at the foot of a
huge oak, beneath which the young girl was to repose. When the grave was
formed, the father kissed her first, and then the lover; afterwards, one
taking the head, the other the feet, they placed her in the grave. Then
they knelt on each side of the grave, and said the prayers of the dead.
Then, when they had finished, they cast the earth over the corpse, until
the grave was filled. Then, extending his hand, the old man said; 'I
thank you, my son; and now leave me alone.'

"'Yet----' replied Carlini.

"'Leave me, I command you.'

"Carlini obeyed, rejoined his comrades, folded himself in his cloak, and
soon appeared to sleep as soundly as the rest. It had been resolved the
night before to change their encampment. An hour before daybreak,
Cucumetto aroused his men, and gave the word to march. But Carlini would
not quit the forest, without knowing what had become of Rita's father.
He went toward the place where he had left him. He found the old man
suspended from one of the branches of the oak which shaded his
daughter's grave. He then took an oath of bitter vengeance over the dead
body of the one and the tomb of the other. But he was unable to complete
this oath, for two days afterwards, in an encounter with the Roman
carbineers, Carlini was killed. There was some surprise, however, that,
as he was with his face to the enemy, he should have received a ball
between his shoulders. That astonishment ceased when one of the brigands
remarked to his comrades that Cucumetto was stationed ten paces in
Carlini's rear when he fell. On the morning of the departure from the
forest of Frosinone he had followed Carlini in the darkness, and heard
this oath of vengeance, and, like a wise man, anticipated it.

"They told ten other stories of this bandit chief, each more singular
than the other. Thus, from Fondi to Perusia, everyone trembles at the
name of Cucumetto.

"These narratives were frequently the theme of conversation between
Luigi and Teresa. The young girl trembled very much at hearing the
stories; but Vampa reassured her with a smile, tapping the butt of his
good fowling-piece, which threw its ball so well; and if that did not
restore her courage, he pointed to a crow, perched on some dead branch,
took aim, touched the trigger, and the bird fell dead at the foot of the
tree. Time passed on, and the two young people had agreed to be married
when Vampa should be twenty and Teresa nineteen years of age. They were
both orphans, and had only their employers' leave to ask, which had been
already sought and obtained. One day when they were talking over their
plans for the future, they heard two or three reports of firearms, and
then suddenly a man came out of the wood, near which the two young
persons used to graze their flocks, and hurried towards them. When he
came within hearing, he exclaimed: 'I am pursued; can you conceal me?'

"They knew full well that this fugitive must be a bandit; but there is
an innate sympathy between the Roman brigand and the Roman peasant and
the latter is always ready to aid the former. Vampa, without saying a
word, hastened to the stone that closed up the entrance to their grotto,
drew it away, made a sign to the fugitive to take refuge there, in a
retreat unknown to everyone, closed the stone upon him, and then went
and resumed his seat by Teresa. Instantly afterwards four carbineers, on
horseback, appeared on the edge of the wood; three of them appeared to
be looking for the fugitive, while the fourth dragged a brigand prisoner
by the neck. The three carbineers looked about carefully on every side,
saw the young peasants, and galloping up, began to question them. They
had seen no one.

"'That is very annoying,' said the brigadier; for the man we are looking
for is the chief.'

"'Cucumetto?' cried Luigi and Teresa at the same moment.

"'Yes,' replied the brigadier; 'and as his head is valued at a thousand
Roman crowns, there would have been five hundred for you, if you had
helped us to catch him.' The two young persons exchanged looks. The
brigadier had a moment's hope. Five hundred Roman crowns are three
thousand lire, and three thousand lire are a fortune for two poor
orphans who are going to be married.

"'Yes, it is very annoying,' said Vampa; 'but we have not seen him.'

"Then the carbineers scoured the country in different directions, but in
vain; then, after a time, they disappeared. Vampa then removed the
stone, and Cucumetto came out. Through the crevices in the granite he
had seen the two young peasants talking with the carbineers, and guessed
the subject of their parley. He had read in the countenances of Luigi
and Teresa their steadfast resolution not to surrender him, and he drew
from his pocket a purse full of gold, which he offered to them. But
Vampa raised his head proudly; as to Teresa, her eyes sparkled when she
thought of all the fine gowns and gay jewellery she could buy with this
purse of gold.

"Cucumetto was a cunning fiend, and had assumed the form of a brigand
instead of a serpent, and this look from Teresa showed to him that she
was a worthy daughter of Eve, and he returned to the forest, pausing
several times on his way, under the pretext of saluting his protectors.

"Several days elapsed, and they neither saw nor heard of Cucumetto. The
time of the Carnival was at hand. The Count of San-Felice announced a
grand masked ball, to which all that were distinguished in Rome were
invited. Teresa had a great desire to see this ball. Luigi asked
permission of his protector, the steward, that she and he might be
present amongst the servants of the house. This was granted. The ball
was given by the Count for the particular pleasure of his daughter
Carmela, whom he adored. Carmela was precisely the age and figure of
Teresa, and Teresa was as handsome as Carmela. On the evening of the
ball Teresa was attired in her best, her most brilliant ornaments in her
hair, and gayest glass beads,--she was in the costume of the women of
Frascati. Luigi wore the very picturesque garb of the Roman peasant at
holiday time. They both mingled, as they had leave to do, with the
servants and peasants.

"The _festa_ was magnificent; not only was the villa brilliantly
illuminated, but thousands of colored lanterns were suspended from the
trees in the garden; and very soon the palace overflowed to the
terraces, and the terraces to the garden-walks. At each cross-path was
an orchestra, and tables spread with refreshments; the guests stopped,
formed quadrilles, and danced in any part of the grounds they pleased.
Carmela was attired like a woman of Sonnino. Her cap was embroidered
with pearls, the pins in her hair were of gold and diamonds, her girdle
was of Turkey silk, with large embroidered flowers, her bodice and skirt
were of cashmere, her apron of Indian muslin, and the buttons of her
corset were of jewels. Two of her companions were dressed, the one as a
woman of Nettuno, and the other as a woman of La Riccia. Four young men
of the richest and noblest families of Rome accompanied them with that
Italian freedom which has not its parallel in any other country in the
world. They were attired as peasants of Albano, Velletri, Civita-
Castellana, and Sora. We need hardly add that these peasant costumes,
like those of the young women, were brilliant with gold and jewels.

"Carmela wished to form a quadrille, but there was one lady wanting.
Carmela looked all around her, but not one of the guests had a costume
similar to her own, or those of her companions. The Count of San-Felice
pointed out Teresa, who was hanging on Luigi's arm in a group of
peasants. 'Will you allow me, father?' said Carmela.--'Certainly,'
replied the count, 'are we not in Carnival time?'--Carmela turned
towards the young man who was talking with her, and saying a few words
to him, pointed with her finger to Teresa. The young man looked, bowed
in obedience, and then went to Teresa, and invited her to dance in a
quadrille directed by the count's daughter. Teresa felt a flush pass
over her face; she looked at Luigi, who could not refuse his assent.
Luigi slowly relinquished Teresa's arm, which he had held beneath his
own, and Teresa, accompanied by her elegant cavalier, took her appointed
place with much agitation in the aristocratic quadrille. Certainly, in
the eyes of an artist, the exact and strict costume of Teresa had a very
different character from that of Carmela and her companions; and Teresa
was frivolous and coquettish, and thus the embroidery and muslins, the
cashmere waist-girdles, all dazzled her, and the reflection of sapphires
and diamonds almost turned her giddy brain.

"Luigi felt a sensation hitherto unknown arising in his mind. It was
like an acute pain which gnawed at his heart, and then thrilled through
his whole body. He followed with his eye each movement of Teresa and her
cavalier; when their hands touched, he felt as though he should swoon;
every pulse beat with violence, and it seemed as though a bell were
ringing in his ears. When they spoke, although Teresa listened timidly
and with downcast eyes to the conversation of her cavalier, as Luigi
could read in the ardent looks of the good-looking young man that his
language was that of praise, it seemed as if the whole world was turning
round with him, and all the voices of hell were whispering in his ears
ideas of murder and assassination. Then fearing that his paroxysm might
get the better of him, he clutched with one hand the branch of a tree
against which he was leaning, and with the other convulsively grasped
the dagger with a carved handle which was in his belt, and which,
unwittingly, he drew from the scabbard from time to time. Luigi was
jealous! He felt that, influenced by her ambitions and coquettish
disposition, Teresa might escape him.

"The young peasant girl, at first timid and scared, soon recovered
herself. We have said that Teresa was handsome, but this is not all;
Teresa was endowed with all those wild graces which are so much more
potent than our affected and studied elegancies. She had almost all the
honors of the quadrille, and if she were envious of the Count of San-
Felice's daughter, we will not undertake to say that Carmela was not
jealous of her. And with overpowering compliments her handsome cavalier
led her back to the place whence he had taken her, and where Luigi
awaited her. Twice or thrice during the dance the young girl had glanced
at Luigi, and each time she saw that he was pale and that his features
were agitated, once even the blade of his knife, half drawn from its
sheath, had dazzled her eyes with its sinister glare. Thus, it was
almost tremblingly that she resumed her lover's arm. The quadrille had
been most perfect, and it was evident there was a great demand for a
repetition, Carmela alone objecting to it, but the Count of San-Felice
besought his daughter so earnestly, that she acceded. One of the
cavaliers then hastened to invite Teresa, without whom it was impossible
for the quadrille to be formed, but the young girl had disappeared. The
truth was, that Luigi had not felt the strength to support another such
trial, and, half by persuasion and half by force, he had removed Teresa
toward another part of the garden. Teresa had yielded in spite of
herself, but when she looked at the agitated countenance of the young
man, she understood by his silence and trembling voice that something
strange was passing within him. She herself was not exempt from internal
emotion, and without having done anything wrong, yet fully comprehended
that Luigi was right in reproaching her. Why, she did not know, but yet
she did not the less feel that these reproaches were merited.

"However, to Teresa's great astonishment, Luigi remained mute, and not a
word escaped his lips the rest of the evening. When the chill of the
night had driven away the guests from the gardens, and the gates of the
