before him. There is something so awe-inspiring in great afflictions
that even in the worst times the first emotion of a crowd has generally
been to sympathize with the sufferer in a great catastrophe. Many people
have been assassinated in a tumult, but even criminals have rarely been
insulted during trial. Thus Villefort passed through the mass of
spectators and officers of the Palais, and withdrew. Though he had
acknowledged his guilt, he was protected by his grief. There are some
situations which men understand by instinct, but which reason is
powerless to explain; in such cases the greatest poet is he who gives
utterance to the most natural and vehement outburst of sorrow. Those who
hear the bitter cry are as much impressed as if they listened to an
entire poem, and when the sufferer is sincere they are right in
regarding his outburst as sublime.

It would be difficult to describe the state of stupor in which Villefort
left the Palais. Every pulse beat with feverish excitement, every nerve
was strained, every vein swollen, and every part of his body seemed to
suffer distinctly from the rest, thus multiplying his agony a thousand-
fold. He made his way along the corridors through force of habit; he
threw aside his magisterial robe, not out of deference to etiquette, but
because it was an unbearable burden, a veritable garb of Nessus,
insatiate in torture. Having staggered as far as the Rue Dauphiné, he
perceived his carriage, awoke his sleeping coachman by opening the door
himself, threw himself on the cushions, and pointed towards the Faubourg
Saint-Honoré; the carriage drove on.

The weight of his fallen fortunes seemed suddenly to crush him; he could
not foresee the consequences; he could not contemplate the future with
the indifference of the hardened criminal who merely faces a contingency
already familiar.


God was still in his heart. "God," he murmured, not knowing what he
said,--"God--God!" Behind the event that had overwhelmed him he saw the
hand of God. The carriage rolled rapidly onward. Villefort, while
turning restlessly on the cushions, felt something press against him. He
put out his hand to remove the object; it was a fan which Madame de
Villefort had left in the carriage; this fan awakened a recollection
which darted through his mind like lightning. He thought of his wife.


"Oh!" he exclaimed, as though a red-hot iron were piercing his heart.
During the last hour his own crime had alone been presented to his mind;
now another object, not less terrible, suddenly presented itself. His
wife! He had just acted the inexorable judge with her, he had condemned
her to death, and she, crushed by remorse, struck with terror, covered
with the shame inspired by the eloquence of _his_ irreproachable
virtue,--she, a poor, weak woman, without help or the power of defending
herself against his absolute and supreme will,--she might at that very
moment, perhaps, be preparing to die!

An hour had elapsed since her condemnation; at that moment, doubtless,
she was recalling all her crimes to her memory; she was asking pardon
for her sins; perhaps she was even writing a letter imploring
forgiveness from her virtuous husband--a forgiveness she was purchasing
with her death! Villefort again groaned with anguish and despair.

"Ah," he exclaimed, "that woman became criminal only from associating
with me! I carried the infection of crime with me, and she has caught it
as she would the typhus fever, the cholera, the plague! And yet I have
punished her--I have dared to tell her--_I_ have--'Repent and die!' But
no, she must not die; she shall live, and with me. We will flee from
Paris and go as far as the earth reaches. I told her of the scaffold;
oh, heavens, I forgot that it awaits me also! How could I pronounce that
word? Yes, we will fly; I will confess all to her,--I will tell her
daily that I also have committed a crime!--Oh, what an alliance--the
tiger and the serpent; worthy wife of such as I am! She _must_ live that
my infamy may diminish hers." And Villefort dashed open the window in
front of the carriage.

"Faster, faster!" he cried, in a tone which electrified the coachman.
The horses, impelled by fear, flew towards the house.

"Yes, yes," repeated Villefort, as he approached his home--"yes, that
woman must live; she must repent, and educate my son, the sole survivor,
with the exception of the indestructible old man, of the wreck of my
house. She loves him; it was for his sake she has committed these
crimes. We ought never to despair of softening the heart of a mother who
loves her child. She will repent, and no one will know that she has been
guilty. The events which have taken place in my house, though they now
occupy the public mind, will be forgotten in time, or if, indeed, a few
enemies should persist in remembering them, why then I will add them to
my list of crimes. What will it signify if one, two, or three more are
added? My wife and child shall escape from this gulf, carrying treasures
with them; she will live and may yet be happy, since her child, in whom
all her love is centred, will be with her. I shall have performed a good
action, and my heart will be lighter." And the procureur breathed more
freely than he had done for some time.


The carriage stopped at the door of the house. Villefort leaped out of
the carriage, and saw that his servants were surprised at his early
return; he could read no other expression on their features. Neither of
them spoke to him; they merely stood aside to let him pass by, as usual,
nothing more. As he passed by M. Noirtier's room, he perceived two
figures through the half-open door; but he experienced no curiosity to
know who was visiting his father: anxiety carried him on further.

"Come," he said, as he ascended the stairs leading to his wife's room,
"nothing is changed here." He then closed the door of the landing. "No
one must disturb us," he said; "I must speak freely to her, accuse
myself, and say"--he approached the door, touched the crystal handle,
which yielded to his hand. "Not locked," he cried; "that is well." And
he entered the little room in which Edward slept; for though the child
went to school during the day, his mother could not allow him to be
separated from her at night. With a single glance Villefort's eye ran
through the room. "Not here," he said; "doubtless she is in her
bedroom." He rushed towards the door, found it bolted, and stopped,
shuddering. "Héloïse!" he cried. He fancied he heard the sound of a
piece of furniture being removed. "Héloïse!" he repeated.

"Who is there?" answered the voice of her he sought. He thought that
voice more feeble than usual.

"Open the door!" cried Villefort. "Open; it is I." But notwithstanding
this request, notwithstanding the tone of anguish in which it was
uttered, the door remained closed. Villefort burst it open with a
violent blow. At the entrance of the room which led to her boudoir,
Madame de Villefort was standing erect, pale, her features contracted,
and her eyes glaring horribly.

"Héloïse, Héloïse!" he said, "what is the matter? Speak!" The young
woman extended her stiff white hands towards him.

"It is done, monsieur," she said with a rattling noise which seemed to
tear her throat. "What more do you want?" and she fell full length on
the floor.

Villefort ran to her and seized her hand, which convulsively clasped a
crystal bottle with a golden stopper. Madame de Villefort was dead.
Villefort, maddened with horror, stepped back to the threshhold of the
door, fixing his eyes on the corpse: "My son!" he exclaimed suddenly,
"where is my son?--Edward, Edward!" and he rushed out of the room, still
crying, "Edward, Edward!" The name was pronounced in such a tone of
anguish that the servants ran up.

"Where is my son?" asked Villefort; "let him be removed from the house,
that he may not see----"

"Master Edward is not downstairs, sir," replied the valet.

"Then he must be playing in the garden; go and see."


"No, sir; Madame de Villefort sent for him half an hour ago; he went
into her room, and has not been downstairs since." A cold perspiration
burst out on Villefort's brow; his legs trembled, and his thoughts flew
about madly in his brain like the wheels of a disordered watch.

"In Madame de Villefort's room?" he murmured and slowly returned, with
one hand wiping his forehead, and with the other supporting himself
against the wall. To enter the room he must again see the body of his
unfortunate wife. To call Edward he must reawaken the echo of that room
which now appeared like a sepulchre; to speak seemed like violating the
silence of the tomb. His tongue was paralyzed in his mouth.

"Edward!" he stammered--"Edward!" The child did not answer. Where, then,
could he be, if he had entered his mother's room and not since returned?
He stepped forward. The corpse of Madame de Villefort was stretched
across the doorway leading to the room in which Edward must be; those
glaring eyes seemed to watch over the threshold, and the lips bore the
stamp of a terrible and mysterious irony. Through the open door was
visible a portion of the boudoir, containing an upright piano and a blue
satin couch. Villefort stepped forward two or three paces, and beheld
his child lying--no doubt asleep--on the sofa. The unhappy man uttered
an exclamation of joy; a ray of light seemed to penetrate the abyss of
despair and darkness. He had only to step over the corpse, enter the
boudoir, take the child in his arms, and flee far, far away.

Villefort was no longer the civilized man; he was a tiger hurt unto
death, gnashing his teeth in his wound. He no longer feared realities,
but phantoms. He leaped over the corpse as if it had been a burning
brazier. He took the child in his arms, embraced him, shook him, called
him, but the child made no response. He pressed his burning lips to the
cheeks, but they were icy cold and pale; he felt the stiffened limbs; he
pressed his hand upon the heart, but it no longer beat,--the child was
dead.

A folded paper fell from Edward's breast. Villefort, thunderstruck, fell
upon his knees; the child dropped from his arms, and rolled on the floor
by the side of its mother. He picked up the paper, and, recognizing his
wife's writing, ran his eyes rapidly over its contents; it ran as
follows:--

"You know that I was a good mother, since it was for my son's sake I
became criminal. A good mother cannot depart without her son."


Villefort could not believe his eyes,--he could not believe his reason;
he dragged himself towards the child's body, and examined it as a
lioness contemplates its dead cub. Then a piercing cry escaped from his
breast, and he cried,

"Still the hand of God."

The presence of the two victims alarmed him; he could not bear solitude
shared only by two corpses. Until then he had been sustained by rage, by
his strength of mind, by despair, by the supreme agony which led the
Titans to scale the heavens, and Ajax to defy the gods. He now arose,
his head bowed beneath the weight of grief, and, shaking his damp,
