"The police."

"Then the news originated----"

"At the prefect's last night. Paris, you can understand, is astonished
at the sight of such unusual splendor, and the police have made
inquiries."

"Well, well! Nothing more is wanting than to arrest the count as a
vagabond, on the pretext of his being too rich."

"Indeed, that doubtless would have happened if his credentials had not
been so favorable."

"Poor count! And is he aware of the danger he has been in?"

"I think not."

"Then it will be but charitable to inform him. When he arrives, I will
not fail to do so."

Just then, a handsome young man, with bright eyes, black hair, and
glossy moustache, respectfully bowed to Madame de Villefort. Albert
extended his hand. "Madame," said Albert, "allow me to present to you M.
Maximilian Morrel, captain of Spahis, one of our best, and, above all,
of our bravest officers."

"I have already had the pleasure of meeting this gentleman at Auteuil,
at the house of the Count of Monte Cristo," replied Madame de Villefort,
turning away with marked coldness of manner. This answer, and especially
the tone in which it was uttered, chilled the heart of poor Morrel. But
a recompense was in store for him; turning around, he saw near the door
a beautiful fair face, whose large blue eyes were, without any marked
expression, fixed upon him, while the bouquet of myosotis was gently
raised to her lips.

The salutation was so well understood that Morrel, with the same
expression in his eyes, placed his handkerchief to his mouth; and these
two living statues, whose hearts beat so violently under their marble
aspect, separated from each other by the whole length of the room,
forgot themselves for a moment, or rather forgot the world in their
mutual contemplation. They might have remained much longer lost in one
another, without anyone noticing their abstraction. The Count of Monte
Cristo had just entered.

We have already said that there was something in the count which
attracted universal attention wherever he appeared. It was not the coat,
unexceptional in its cut, though simple and unornamented; it was not the
plain white waistcoat; it was not the trousers, that displayed the foot
so perfectly formed--it was none of these things that attracted the
attention,--it was his pale complexion, his waving black hair, his calm
and serene expression, his dark and melancholy eye, his mouth, chiselled
with such marvellous delicacy, which so easily expressed such high
disdain,--these were what fixed the attention of all upon him. Many men
might have been handsomer, but certainly there could be none whose
appearance was more _significant_, if the expression may be used.
Everything about the count seemed to have its meaning, for the constant
habit of thought which he had acquired had given an ease and vigor to
the expression of his face, and even to the most trifling gesture,
scarcely to be understood. Yet the Parisian world is so strange, that
even all this might not have won attention had there not been connected
with it a mysterious story gilded by an immense fortune.


Meanwhile he advanced through the assemblage of guests under a battery
of curious glances towards Madame de Morcerf, who, standing before a
mantle-piece ornamented with flowers, had seen his entrance in a
looking-glass placed opposite the door, and was prepared to receive him.
She turned towards him with a serene smile just at the moment he was
bowing to her. No doubt she fancied the count would speak to her, while
on his side the count thought she was about to address him; but both
remained silent, and after a mere bow, Monte Cristo directed his steps
to Albert, who received him cordially. "Have you seen my mother?" asked
Albert.

"I have just had the pleasure," replied the count; "but I have not seen
your father."

"See, he is down there, talking politics with that little group of great
geniuses."

"Indeed?" said Monte Cristo; "and so those gentlemen down there are men
of great talent. I should not have guessed it. And for what kind of
talent are they celebrated? You know there are different sorts."

"That tall, harsh-looking man is very learned, he discovered, in the
neighborhood of Rome, a kind of lizard with a vertebra more than lizards
usually have, and he immediately laid his discovery before the
Institute. The thing was discussed for a long time, but finally decided
in his favor. I can assure you the vertebra made a great noise in the
learned world, and the gentleman, who was only a knight of the Legion of
Honor, was made an officer."

"Come," said Monte Cristo, "this cross seems to me to be wisely awarded.
I suppose, had he found another additional vertebra, they would have
made him a commander."

"Very likely," said Albert.

"And who can that person be who has taken it into his head to wrap
himself up in a blue coat embroidered with green?"

"Oh, that coat is not his own idea; it is the Republic's, which deputed
David [*] to devise a uniform for the Academicians."


* Louis David, a famous French painter.

"Indeed?" said Monte Cristo; "so this gentleman is an Academician?"

"Within the last week he has been made one of the learned assembly."

"And what is his especial talent?"

"His talent? I believe he thrusts pins through the heads of rabbits, he
makes fowls eat madder, and punches the spinal marrow out of dogs with
whalebone."

"And he is made a member of the Academy of Sciences for this?"

"No; of the French Academy."

"But what has the French Academy to do with all this?"

"I was going to tell you. It seems----"

"That his experiments have very considerably advanced the cause of
science, doubtless?"

"No; that his style of writing is very good."

"This must be very flattering to the feelings of the rabbits into whose
heads he has thrust pins, to the fowls whose bones he has dyed red, and
to the dogs whose spinal marrow he has punched out?"

Albert laughed.

"And the other one?" demanded the count.

"That one?"

"Yes, the third."

"The one in the dark blue coat?"

"Yes."

"He is a colleague of the count, and one of the most active opponents to
the idea of providing the Chamber of Peers with a uniform. He was very
successful upon that question. He stood badly with the Liberal papers,
but his noble opposition to the wishes of the court is now getting him
into favor with the journalists. They talk of making him an ambassador."


"And what are his claims to the peerage?"

"He has composed two or three comic operas, written four or five
articles in the _Siècle_, and voted five or six years on the ministerial
side."

"Bravo, Viscount," said Monte Cristo, smiling; "you are a delightful
_cicerone_. And now you will do me a favor, will you not?"

"What is it?"

"Do not introduce me to any of these gentlemen; and should they wish it,
you will warn me." Just then the count felt his arm pressed. He turned
round; it was Danglars.

"Ah, is it you, baron?" said he.

"Why do you call me baron?" said Danglars; "you know that I care nothing
for my title. I am not like you, viscount; you like your title, do you
not?"

"Certainly," replied Albert, "seeing that without my title I should be
nothing; while you, sacrificing the baron, would still remain the
millionaire."

"Which seems to me the finest title under the royalty of July," replied
Danglars.

"Unfortunately," said Monte Cristo, "one's title to a millionaire does
not last for life, like that of baron, peer of France, or academician;
for example, the millionaires Franck & Poulmann, of Frankfurt, who have
just become bankrupts."

"Indeed?" said Danglars, becoming pale.

"Yes; I received the news this evening by a courier. I had about a
million in their hands, but, warned in time, I withdrew it a month ago."

"Ah, _mon Dieu!_" exclaimed Danglars, "they have drawn on me for 200,000
francs!"

"Well, you can throw out the draft; their signature is worth five per
cent."

"Yes, but it is too late," said Danglars, "I have honored their bills."

