
"Alas, yes; the poor old gentleman is entirely helpless; the mind alone
is still active in this human machine, and that is faint and flickering,
like the light of a lamp about to expire. But excuse me, sir, for
talking of our domestic misfortunes; I interrupted you at the moment
when you were telling me that you were a skilful chemist."

"No, madame, I did not say as much as that," replied the count with a
smile; "quite the contrary. I have studied chemistry because, having
determined to live in eastern climates I have been desirous of following
the example of King Mithridates."

"_Mithridates, rex Ponticus_," said the young scamp, as he tore some
beautiful portraits out of a splendid album, "the individual who took
cream in his cup of poison every morning at breakfast."

"Edward, you naughty boy," exclaimed Madame de Villefort, snatching the
mutilated book from the urchin's grasp, "you are positively past
bearing; you really disturb the conversation; go, leave us, and join
your sister Valentine in dear grandpapa Noirtier's room."

"The album," said Edward sulkily.

"What do you mean?--the album!"

"I want the album."

"How dare you tear out the drawings?"

"Oh, it amuses me."

"Go--go at once."

"I won't go unless you give me the album," said the boy, seating himself
doggedly in an armchair, according to his habit of never giving way.

"Take it, then, and pray disturb us no longer," said Madame de
Villefort, giving the album to Edward, who then went towards the door,
led by his mother. The count followed her with his eyes.

"Let us see if she shuts the door after him," he muttered. Madame de
Villefort closed the door carefully after the child, the count appearing
not to notice her; then casting a scrutinizing glance around the
chamber, the young wife returned to her chair, in which she seated
herself. "Allow me to observe, madame," said the count, with that kind
tone he could assume so well, "you are really very severe with that dear
clever child."

"Oh, sometimes severity is quite necessary," replied Madame de
Villefort, with all a mother's real firmness.

"It was his Cornelius Nepos that Master Edward was repeating when he
referred to King Mithridates," continued the count, "and you interrupted
him in a quotation which proves that his tutor has by no means neglected
him, for your son is really advanced for his years."

"The fact is, count," answered the mother, agreeably flattered, "he has
great aptitude, and learns all that is set before him. He has but one
fault, he is somewhat wilful; but really, on referring for the moment to
what he said, do you truly believe that Mithridates used these
precautions, and that these precautions were efficacious?"

"I think so, madame, because I myself have made use of them, that I
might not be poisoned at Naples, at Palermo, and at Smyrna--that is to
say, on three several occasions when, but for these precautions, I must
have lost my life."

"And your precautions were successful?"

"Completely so."

"Yes, I remember now your mentioning to me at Perugia something of this
sort."

"Indeed?" said the count with an air of surprise, remarkably well
counterfeited; "I really did not remember."

"I inquired of you if poisons acted equally, and with the same effect,
on men of the North as on men of the South; and you answered me that the
cold and sluggish habits of the North did not present the same aptitude
as the rich and energetic temperaments of the natives of the South."

"And that is the case," observed Monte Cristo. "I have seen Russians
devour, without being visibly inconvenienced, vegetable substances which
would infallibly have killed a Neapolitan or an Arab."

"And you really believe the result would be still more sure with us than
in the East, and in the midst of our fogs and rains a man would
habituate himself more easily than in a warm latitude to this
progressive absorption of poison?"

"Certainly; it being at the same time perfectly understood that he
should have been duly fortified against the poison to which he had not
been accustomed."

"Yes, I understand that; and how would you habituate yourself, for
instance, or rather, how did you habituate yourself to it?"

"Oh, very easily. Suppose you knew beforehand the poison that would be
made use of against you; suppose the poison was, for instance, brucine--
--"

"Brucine is extracted from the false angostura [*] is it not?" inquired
Madame de Villefort.

"Precisely, madame," replied Monte Cristo; "but I perceive I have not
much to teach you. Allow me to compliment you on your knowledge; such
learning is very rare among ladies."


* Brucea ferruginea.

"Oh, I am aware of that," said Madame de Villefort; "but I have a
passion for the occult sciences, which speak to the imagination like
poetry, and are reducible to figures, like an algebraic equation; but go
on, I beg of you; what you say interests me to the greatest degree."


"Well," replied Monte Cristo "suppose, then, that this poison was
brucine, and you were to take a milligramme the first day, two
milligrammes the second day, and so on. Well, at the end of ten days you
would have taken a centigramme, at the end of twenty days, increasing
another milligramme, you would have taken three hundred centigrammes;
that is to say, a dose which you would support without inconvenience,
and which would be very dangerous for any other person who had not taken
the same precautions as yourself. Well, then, at the end of a month,
when drinking water from the same carafe, you would kill the person who
drank with you, without your perceiving, otherwise than from slight
inconvenience, that there was any poisonous substance mingled with this
water."

"Do you know any other counter-poisons?"

"I do not."

"I have often read, and read again, the history of Mithridates," said
Madame de Villefort in a tone of reflection, "and had always considered
it a fable."

"No, madame, contrary to most history, it is true; but what you tell me,
madame, what you inquire of me, is not the result of a chance query, for
two years ago you asked me the same questions, and said then, that for a
very long time this history of Mithridates had occupied your mind."

"True, sir. The two favorite studies of my youth were botany and
mineralogy, and subsequently, when I learned that the use of simples
frequently explained the whole history of a people, and the entire life
of individuals in the East, as flowers betoken and symbolize a love
affair, I have regretted that I was not a man, that I might have been a
Flamel, a Fontana, or a Cabanis."

"And the more, madame," said Monte Cristo, "as the Orientals do not
confine themselves, as did Mithridates, to make a cuirass of his
poisons, but they also made them a dagger. Science becomes, in their
hands, not only a defensive weapon, but still more frequently an
offensive one; the one serves against all their physical sufferings, the
other against all their enemies. With opium, belladonna, brucea, snake-
wood, and the cherry-laurel, they put to sleep all who stand in their
way. There is not one of those women, Egyptian, Turkish, or Greek, whom
here you call 'good women,' who do not know how, by means of chemistry,
to stupefy a doctor, and in psychology to amaze a confessor."

"Really," said Madame de Villefort, whose eyes sparkled with strange
fire at this conversation.

"Oh, yes, indeed, madame," continued Monte Cristo, "the secret dramas of
the East begin with a love philtre and end with a death potion--begin
with paradise and end with--hell. There are as many elixirs of every
kind as there are caprices and peculiarities in the physical and moral
nature of humanity; and I will say further--the art of these chemists is
capable with the utmost precision to accommodate and proportion the
remedy and the bane to yearnings for love or desires for vengeance."

"But, sir," remarked the young woman, "these Eastern societies, in the
midst of which you have passed a portion of your existence, are as
fantastic as the tales that come from their strange land. A man can
easily be put out of the way there, then; it is, indeed, the Bagdad and
Bassora of the _Thousand and One Nights_. The sultans and viziers who
rule over society there, and who constitute what in France we call the
government, are really Haroun-al-Raschids and Giaffars, who not only
pardon a poisoner, but even make him a prime minister, if his crime has
been an ingenious one, and who, under such circumstances, have the whole
story written in letters of gold, to divert their hours of idleness and
_ennui_."

"By no means, madame; the fanciful exists no longer in the East. There,
disguised under other names, and concealed under other costumes, are
police agents, magistrates, attorneys-general, and bailiffs. They hang,
behead, and impale their criminals in the most agreeable possible
manner; but some of these, like clever rogues, have contrived to escape
human justice, and succeed in their fraudulent enterprises by cunning
stratagems. Amongst us a simpleton, possessed by the demon of hate or
cupidity, who has an enemy to destroy, or some near relation to dispose
of, goes straight to the grocer's or druggist's, gives a false name,
which leads more easily to his detection than his real one, and under
the pretext that the rats prevent him from sleeping, purchases five or
six grammes of arsenic--if he is really a cunning fellow, he goes to
five or six different druggists or grocers, and thereby becomes only
five or six times more easily traced;--then, when he has acquired his
specific, he administers duly to his enemy, or near kinsman, a dose of
