study heraldry?"

"In your service, excellency, where everything is learned."

"Go on, I am curious to know two things."

"What are they, your excellency?"

"What became of this little boy? for I think you told me it was a boy,
M. Bertuccio."

"No excellency, I do not recollect telling you that."

"I thought you did; I must have been mistaken."

"No, you were not, for it was in reality a little boy. But your
excellency wished to know two things; what was the second?"

"The second was the crime of which you were accused when you asked for a
confessor, and the Abbé Busoni came to visit you at your request in the
prison at Nîmes."

"The story will be very long, excellency."

"What matter? you know I take but little sleep, and I do not suppose you
are very much inclined for it either." Bertuccio bowed, and resumed his
story.

"Partly to drown the recollections of the past that haunted me, partly
to supply the wants of the poor widow, I eagerly returned to my trade of
smuggler, which had become more easy since that relaxation of the laws
which always follows a revolution. The southern districts were ill-
watched in particular, in consequence of the disturbances that were
perpetually breaking out in Avignon, Nîmes, or Uzès. We profited by this
respite on the part of the government to make friends everywhere. Since
my brother's assassination in the streets of Nîmes, I had never entered
the town; the result was that the innkeeper with whom we were connected,
seeing that we would no longer come to him, was forced to come to us,
and had established a branch to his inn, on the road from Bellegarde to
Beaucaire, at the sign of the Pont du Gard. We had thus, at Aigues-
Mortes, Martigues, or Bouc, a dozen places where we left our goods, and
where, in case of necessity, we concealed ourselves from the gendarmes
and custom-house officers. Smuggling is a profitable trade, when a
certain degree of vigor and intelligence is employed; as for myself,
brought up in the mountains, I had a double motive for fearing the
gendarmes and custom-house officers, as my appearance before the judges
would cause an inquiry, and an inquiry always looks back into the past.
And in my past life they might find something far more grave than the
selling of smuggled cigars, or barrels of brandy without a permit. So,
preferring death to capture, I accomplished the most astonishing deeds,
and which, more than once, showed me that the too great care we take of
our bodies is the only obstacle to the success of those projects which
require rapid decision, and vigorous and determined execution. In
reality, when you have once devoted your life to your enterprises, you
are no longer the equal of other men, or, rather, other men are no
longer your equals, and whosoever has taken this resolution, feels his
strength and resources doubled."

"Philosophy, M. Bertuccio," interrupted the Count; "you have done a
little of everything in your life."

"Oh, excellency!"

"No, no; but philosophy at half-past ten at night is somewhat late; yet
I have no other observation to make, for what you say is correct, which
is more than can be said for all philosophy."

"My journeys became more and more extensive and more productive. Assunta
took care of all, and our little fortune increased. One day as I was
setting off on an expedition, 'Go,' said she; 'at your return I will
give you a surprise.' I questioned her, but in vain; she would tell me
nothing, and I departed. Our expedition lasted nearly six weeks; we had
been to Lucca to take in oil, to Leghorn for English cottons, and we ran
our cargo without opposition, and returned home full of joy. When I
entered the house, the first thing I beheld in the middle of Assunta's
chamber was a cradle that might be called sumptuous compared with the
rest of the furniture, and in it a baby seven or eight months old. I
uttered a cry of joy; the only moments of sadness I had known since the
assassination of the procureur were caused by the recollection that I
had abandoned this child. For the assassination itself I had never felt
any remorse. Poor Assunta had guessed all. She had profited by my
absence, and furnished with the half of the linen, and having written
down the day and hour at which I had deposited the child at the asylum,
had set off for Paris, and had reclaimed it. No objection was raised,
and the infant was given up to her. Ah, I confess, your excellency, when
I saw this poor creature sleeping peacefully in its cradle, I felt my
eyes filled with tears. 'Ah, Assunta,' cried I, 'you are an excellent
woman, and heaven will bless you.'"

"This," said Monte Cristo, "is less correct than your philosophy,--it is
only faith."

"Alas, your excellency is right," replied Bertuccio, "and God made this
infant the instrument of our punishment. Never did a perverse nature
declare itself more prematurely, and yet it was not owing to any fault
in his bringing up. He was a most lovely child, with large blue eyes, of
that deep color that harmonizes so well with the blond complexion; only
his hair, which was too light, gave his face a most singular expression,
and added to the vivacity of his look, and the malice of his smile.
Unfortunately, there is a proverb which says that 'red is either
altogether good or altogether bad.' The proverb was but too correct as
regarded Benedetto, and even in his infancy he manifested the worst
disposition. It is true that the indulgence of his foster-mother
encouraged him. This child, for whom my poor sister would go to the
town, five or six leagues off, to purchase the earliest fruits and the
most tempting sweetmeats, preferred to Palma grapes or Genoese
preserves, the chestnuts stolen from a neighbor's orchard, or the dried
apples in his loft, when he could eat as well of the nuts and apples
that grew in my garden. One day, when Benedetto was about five or six,
our neighbor Wasilio, who, according to the custom of the country, never
locked up his purse or his valuables--for, as your excellency knows,
there are no thieves in Corsica--complained that he had lost a louis out
of his purse; we thought he must have made a mistake in counting his
money, but he persisted in the accuracy of his statement. One day,
Benedetto, who had been gone from the house since morning, to our great
anxiety, did not return until late in the evening, dragging a monkey
after him, which he said he had found chained to the foot of a tree. For
more than a month past, the mischievous child, who knew not what to wish
for, had taken it into his head to have a monkey. A boatman, who had
passed by Rogliano, and who had several of these animals, whose tricks
had greatly diverted him, had, doubtless, suggested this idea to him.
'Monkeys are not found in our woods chained to trees,' said I; 'confess
how you obtained this animal.' Benedetto maintained the truth of what he
had said, and accompanied it with details that did more honor to his
imagination than to his veracity. I became angry; he began to laugh, I
threatened to strike him, and he made two steps backwards. 'You cannot
beat me,' said he; 'you have no right, for you are not my father.'


"We never knew who had revealed this fatal secret, which we had so
carefully concealed from him; however, it was this answer, in which the
child's whole character revealed itself, that almost terrified me, and
my arm fell without touching him. The boy triumphed, and this victory
rendered him so audacious, that all the money of Assunta, whose
affection for him seemed to increase as he became more unworthy of it,
was spent in caprices she knew not how to contend against, and follies
she had not the courage to prevent. When I was at Rogliano everything
went on properly, but no sooner was my back turned than Benedetto became
master, and everything went ill. When he was only eleven, he chose his
companions from among the young men of eighteen or twenty, the worst
characters in Bastia, or, indeed, in Corsica, and they had already, for
some mischievous pranks, been several times threatened with a
prosecution. I became alarmed, as any prosecution might be attended with
serious consequences. I was compelled, at this period, to leave Corsica
on an important expedition; I reflected for a long time, and with the
hope of averting some impending misfortune, I resolved that Benedetto
should accompany me. I hoped that the active and laborious life of a
smuggler, with the severe discipline on board, would have a salutary
effect on his character, which was now well-nigh, if not quite, corrupt.
I spoke to Benedetto alone, and proposed to him to accompany me,
endeavoring to tempt him by all the promises most likely to dazzle the
imagination of a child of twelve. He heard me patiently, and when I had
finished, burst out laughing.

"'Are you mad, uncle?' (he called me by this name when he was in good
humor); 'do you think I am going to change the life I lead for your mode
of existence--my agreeable indolence for the hard and precarious toil
you impose on yourself, exposed to the bitter frost at night, and the
scorching heat by day, compelled to conceal yourself, and when you are
perceived, receive a volley of bullets, all to earn a paltry sum? Why, I
have as much money as I want; mother Assunta always furnishes me when I
ask for it! You see that I should be a fool to accept your offer.' The
arguments, and his audacity, perfectly stupefied me. Benedetto rejoined
his associates, and I saw him from a distance point me out to them as a
fool."

"Sweet child," murmured Monte Cristo.

"Oh, had he been my own son," replied Bertuccio, "or even my nephew, I
would have brought him back to the right road, for the knowledge that
you are doing your duty gives you strength, but the idea that I was
striking a child whose father I had killed, made it impossible for me to
punish him. I gave my sister, who constantly defended the unfortunate
boy, good advice, and as she confessed that she had several times missed
money to a considerable amount, I showed her a safe place in which to
conceal our little treasure for the future. My mind was already made up.
Benedetto could read, write, and cipher perfectly, for when the fit
seized him, he learned more in a day than others in a week. My intention
was to enter him as a clerk in some ship, and without letting him know
anything of my plan, to convey him some morning on board; by this means
his future treatment would depend upon his own conduct. I set off for
France, after having fixed upon the plan. Our cargo was to be landed in
the Gulf of Lyons, and this was a difficult thing to do because it was
then the year 1829. The most perfect tranquillity was restored, and the
vigilance of the custom-house officers was redoubled, and their
strictness was increased at this time, in consequence of the fair at
Beaucaire.


"Our expedition made a favorable beginning. We anchored our vessel--
which had a double hold, where our goods were concealed--amidst a number
of other vessels that bordered the banks of the Rhône from Beaucaire to
Arles. On our arrival we began to discharge our cargo in the night, and
to convey it into the town, by the help of the innkeeper with whom we
were connected. Whether success rendered us imprudent, or whether we
were betrayed, I know not; but one evening, about five o'clock, our
little cabin-boy came breathlessly, to inform us that he had seen a
detachment of custom-house officers advancing in our direction. It was
not their proximity that alarmed us, for detachments were constantly
patrolling along the banks of the Rhône, but the care, according to the
