the room was at Noirtier, whose face, independent of the emotion which
such a scene could not fail of producing, proclaimed him to be in
possession of his usual health; her second glance was at the dying man.
She turned pale, and her eye passed quickly from the servant and rested
on the master.

"In the name of heaven, madame," said Villefort, "where is the doctor?
He was with you just now. You see this is a fit of apoplexy, and he
might be saved if he could but be bled!"

"Has he eaten anything lately?" asked Madame de Villefort, eluding her
husband's question. "Madame," replied Valentine, "he has not even
breakfasted. He has been running very fast on an errand with which my
grandfather charged him, and when he returned, took nothing but a glass
of lemonade."

"Ah," said Madame de Villefort, "why did he not take wine? Lemonade was
a very bad thing for him."

"Grandpapa's bottle of lemonade was standing just by his side; poor
Barrois was very thirsty, and was thankful to drink anything he could
find." Madame de Villefort started. Noirtier looked at her with a glance
of the most profound scrutiny. "He has such a short neck," said she.
"Madame," said Villefort, "I ask where is M. d'Avrigny? In God's name
answer me!"

"He is with Edward, who is not quite well," replied Madame de Villefort,
no longer being able to avoid answering.

Villefort rushed upstairs to fetch him. "Take this," said Madame de
Villefort, giving her smelling-bottle to Valentine. "They will, no
doubt, bleed him; therefore I will retire, for I cannot endure the sight
of blood;" and she followed her husband upstairs. Morrel now emerged
from his hiding-place, where he had remained quite unperceived, so great
had been the general confusion. "Go away as quick as you can,
Maximilian," said Valentine, "and stay till I send for you. Go."

Morrel looked towards Noirtier for permission to retire. The old man,
who had preserved all his usual coolness, made a sign to him to do so.
The young man pressed Valentine's hand to his lips, and then left the
house by a back staircase. At the same moment that he quitted the room,
Villefort and the doctor entered by an opposite door. Barrois was now
showing signs of returning consciousness. The crisis seemed past, a low
moaning was heard, and he raised himself on one knee. D'Avrigny and
Villefort laid him on a couch. "What do you prescribe, doctor?" demanded
Villefort. "Give me some water and ether. You have some in the house,
have you not?"

"Yes."

"Send for some oil of turpentine and tartar emetic."

Villefort immediately despatched a messenger. "And now let everyone
retire."

"Must I go too?" asked Valentine timidly.

"Yes, mademoiselle, you especially," replied the doctor abruptly.

Valentine looked at M. d'Avrigny with astonishment, kissed her
grandfather on the forehead, and left the room. The doctor closed the
door after her with a gloomy air. "Look, look, doctor," said Villefort,
"he is quite coming round again; I really do not think, after all, it is
anything of consequence." M. d'Avrigny answered by a melancholy smile.
"How do you feel, Barrois?" asked he. "A little better, sir."

"Will you drink some of this ether and water?"

"I will try; but don't touch me."

"Why not?"

"Because I feel that if you were only to touch me with the tip of your
finger the fit would return."

"Drink."

Barrois took the glass, and, raising it to his purple lips, took about
half of the liquid offered him. "Where do you suffer?" asked the doctor.

"Everywhere. I feel cramps over my whole body."

"Do you find any dazzling sensation before the eyes?"

"Yes."

"Any noise in the ears?"

"Frightful."


"When did you first feel that?"

"Just now."

"Suddenly?"

"Yes, like a clap of thunder."

"Did you feel nothing of it yesterday or the day before?"

"Nothing."

"No drowsiness?"

"None."

"What have you eaten today?"

"I have eaten nothing; I only drank a glass of my master's lemonade--
that's all;" and Barrois turned towards Noirtier, who, immovably fixed
in his armchair, was contemplating this terrible scene without allowing
a word or a movement to escape him.

"Where is this lemonade?" asked the doctor eagerly.

"Downstairs in the decanter."

"Whereabouts downstairs?"

"In the kitchen."

"Shall I go and fetch it, doctor?" inquired Villefort.

"No, stay here and try to make Barrois drink the rest of this glass of
ether and water. I will go myself and fetch the lemonade." D'Avrigny
bounded towards the door, flew down the back staircase, and almost
knocked down Madame de Villefort, in his haste, who was herself going
down to the kitchen. She cried out, but d'Avrigny paid no attention to
her; possessed with but one idea, he cleared the last four steps with a
bound, and rushed into the kitchen, where he saw the decanter about
three parts empty still standing on the waiter, where it had been left.
He darted upon it as an eagle would seize upon its prey. Panting with
loss of breath, he returned to the room he had just left. Madame de
Villefort was slowly ascending the steps which led to her room. "Is this
the decanter you spoke of?" asked d'Avrigny.

"Yes, doctor."

"Is this the same lemonade of which you partook?"

"I believe so."

"What did it taste like?"

"It had a bitter taste."

The doctor poured some drops of the lemonade into the palm of his hand,
put his lips to it, and after having rinsed his mouth as a man does when
he is tasting wine, he spat the liquor into the fireplace.

"It is no doubt the same," said he. "Did you drink some too, M.
Noirtier?"

"Yes."

"And did you also discover a bitter taste?"

"Yes."

"Oh, doctor," cried Barrois, "the fit is coming on again. Oh, do
something for me." The doctor flew to his patient. "That emetic,
Villefort--see if it is coming." Villefort sprang into the passage,
exclaiming, "The emetic! the emetic!--is it come yet?" No one answered.
The most profound terror reigned throughout the house. "If I had
anything by means of which I could inflate the lungs," said d'Avrigny,
looking around him, "perhaps I might prevent suffocation. But there is
nothing which would do!--nothing!"

"Oh, sir," cried Barrois, "are you going to let me die without help? Oh,
I am dying! Oh, save me!"


"A pen, a pen!" said the doctor. There was one lying on the table; he
endeavored to introduce it into the mouth of the patient, who, in the
midst of his convulsions, was making vain attempts to vomit; but the
jaws were so clenched that the pen could not pass them. This second
attack was much more violent than the first, and he had slipped from the
couch to the ground, where he was writhing in agony. The doctor left him
in this paroxysm, knowing that he could do nothing to alleviate it, and,
going up to Noirtier, said abruptly, "How do you find yourself?--well?"

"Yes."

"Have you any weight on the chest; or does your stomach feel light and
comfortable--eh?"

"Yes."

"Then you feel pretty much as you generally do after you have had the
dose which I am accustomed to give you every Sunday?"

"Yes."

"Did Barrois make your lemonade?"

"Yes."

"Was it you who asked him to drink some of it?"

