
"What is the use of seeing me after we have made all our arrangements?"

"Eh, dear friend," said Caderousse, "are wills ever made without
codicils? But you first came to breakfast, did you not? Well, sit down,
and let us begin with these pilchards, and this fresh butter; which I
have put on some vine-leaves to please you, wicked one. Ah, yes; you
look at my room, my four straw chairs, my images, three francs each. But
what do you expect? This is not the Hôtel des Princes."

"Come, you are growing discontented, you are no longer happy; you, who
only wish to live like a retired baker." Caderousse sighed. "Well, what
have you to say? you have seen your dream realized."

"I can still say it is a dream; a retired baker, my poor Benedetto, is
rich--he has an annuity."

"Well, you have an annuity."

"I have?"


"Yes, since I bring you your two hundred francs." Caderousse shrugged
his shoulders. "It is humiliating," said he, "thus to receive money
given grudgingly,--an uncertain supply which may soon fail. You see I am
obliged to economize, in case your prosperity should cease. Well, my
friend, fortune is inconstant, as the chaplain of the regiment said. I
know your prosperity is great, you rascal; you are to marry the daughter
of Danglars."

"What? of Danglars?"

"Yes, to be sure; must I say Baron Danglars? I might as well say Count
Benedetto. He was an old friend of mine and if he had not so bad a
memory he ought to invite me to your wedding, seeing he came to mine.
Yes, yes, to mine; gad, he was not so proud then,--he was an under-clerk
to the good M. Morrel. I have dined many times with him and the Count of
Morcerf, so you see I have some high connections and were I to cultivate
them a little, we might meet in the same drawing-rooms."

"Come, your jealousy represents everything to you in the wrong light."

"That is all very fine, Benedetto mio, but I know what I am saying.
Perhaps I may one day put on my best coat, and presenting myself at the
great gate, introduce myself. Meanwhile let us sit down and eat."
Caderousse set the example and attacked the breakfast with good
appetite, praising each dish he set before his visitor. The latter
seemed to have resigned himself; he drew the corks, and partook largely
of the fish with the garlic and fat. "Ah, mate," said Caderousse, "you
are getting on better terms with your old landlord!"

"Faith, yes," replied Andrea, whose hunger prevailed over every other
feeling.

"So you like it, you rogue?"

"So much that I wonder how a man who can cook thus can complain of hard
living."

"Do you see," said Caderousse, "all my happiness is marred by one
thought?"

"What is that?"

"That I am dependent on another, I who have always gained my own
livelihood honestly."

"Do not let that disturb you, I have enough for two."

"No, truly; you may believe me if you will; at the end of every month I
am tormented by remorse."

"Good Caderousse!"

"So much so, that yesterday I would not take the two hundred francs."

"Yes, you wished to speak to me; but was it indeed remorse, tell me?"

"True remorse; and, besides, an idea had struck me." Andrea shuddered;
he always did so at Caderousse's ideas. "It is miserable--do you see?--
always to wait till the end of the month."--"Oh," said Andrea
philosophically, determined to watch his companion narrowly, "does not
life pass in waiting? Do I, for instance, fare better? Well, I wait
patiently, do I not?"

"Yes; because instead of expecting two hundred wretched francs, you
expect five or six thousand, perhaps ten, perhaps even twelve, for you
take care not to let anyone know the utmost. Down there, you always had
little presents and Christmas-boxes which you tried to hide from your
poor friend Caderousse. Fortunately he is a cunning fellow, that friend
Caderousse."

"There you are beginning again to ramble, to talk again and again of the
past! But what is the use of teasing me with going all over that again?"

"Ah, you are only one and twenty, and can forget the past; I am fifty,
and am obliged to recollect it. But let us return to business."

"Yes."

"I was going to say, if I were in your place----"

"Well."

"I would realize----"

"How would you realize?"

"I would ask for six months' in advance, under pretence of being able to
purchase a farm, then with my six months I would decamp."

"Well, well," said Andrea, "that isn't a bad idea."

"My dear friend," said Caderousse, "eat of my bread, and take my advice;
you will be none the worse off, physically or morally."

"But," said Andrea, "why do you not act on the advice you gave me? Why
do you not realize a six months', a year's advance even, and retire to
Brussels? Instead of living the retired baker, you might live as a
bankrupt, using his privileges; that would be very good."

"But how the devil would you have me retire on twelve hundred francs?"

"Ah, Caderousse," said Andrea, "how covetous you are! Two months ago you
were dying with hunger."

"The appetite grows by what it feeds on," said Caderousse, grinning and
showing his teeth, like a monkey laughing or a tiger growling. "And,"
added he, biting off with his large white teeth an enormous mouthful of
bread, "I have formed a plan." Caderousse's plans alarmed Andrea still
more than his ideas; ideas were but the germ, the plan was reality. "Let
me see your plan; I dare say it is a pretty one."

"Why not? Who formed the plan by which we left the establishment of M---
-! eh? was it not I? and it was no bad one I believe, since here we
are!"

"I do not say," replied Andrea, "that you never make a good one; but let
us see your plan."

"Well," pursued Caderousse, "can you without expending one sou, put me
in the way of getting fifteen thousand francs? No, fifteen thousand are
not enough,--I cannot again become an honest man with less than thirty
thousand francs."

"No," replied Andrea, dryly, "no, I cannot."

"I do not think you understand me," replied Caderousse, calmly; "I said
without your laying out a sou."

"Do you want me to commit a robbery, to spoil all my good fortune--and
yours with mine--and both of us to be dragged down there again?"

"It would make very little difference to me," said Caderousse, "if I
were retaken, I am a poor creature to live alone, and sometimes pine for
my old comrades; not like you, heartless creature, who would be glad
never to see them again." Andrea did more than tremble this time, he
turned pale.

"Come, Caderousse, no nonsense!" said he.

"Don't alarm yourself, my little Benedetto, but just point out to me
some means of gaining those thirty thousand francs without your
assistance, and I will contrive it."

"Well, I'll see--I'll try to contrive some way," said Andrea.

"Meanwhile you will raise my monthly allowance to five hundred francs,
my little fellow? I have a fancy, and mean to get a housekeeper."

"Well, you shall have your five hundred francs," said Andrea; "but it is
very hard for me, my poor Caderousse--you take advantage----"

"Bah," said Caderousse, "when you have access to countless stores." One
would have said Andrea anticipated his companion's words, so did his eye
flash like lightning, but it was but for a moment. "True," he replied,
"and my protector is very kind."

"That dear protector," said Caderousse; "and how much does he give you
monthly?"

"Five thousand francs."

"As many thousands as you give me hundreds! Truly, it is only bastards
who are thus fortunate. Five thousand francs per month! What the devil
can you do with all that?"

"Oh, it is no trouble to spend that; and I am like you, I want capital."

"Capital?--yes--I understand--everyone would like capital."

"Well, and I shall get it."

"Who will give it to you--your prince?"

"Yes, my prince. But unfortunately I must wait."


"You must wait for what?" asked Caderousse.

