pair of my own horses harnessed to convey it direct to Madame Danglars."

"I dare not return with those dreadful horses," said Madame de
Villefort.

"You will see," replied Monte Cristo, "that they will be as different as
possible in the hands of Ali. With him they will be gentle and docile as
lambs." Ali had, indeed, given proof of this; for, approaching the
animals, who had been got upon their legs with considerable difficulty,
he rubbed their foreheads and nostrils with a sponge soaked in aromatic
vinegar, and wiped off the sweat and foam that covered their mouths.
Then, commencing a loud whistling noise, he rubbed them well all over
their bodies for several minutes; then, undisturbed by the noisy crowd
collected round the broken carriage, Ali quietly harnessed the pacified
animals to the count's chariot, took the reins in his hands, and mounted
the box, when to the utter astonishment of those who had witnessed the
ungovernable spirit and maddened speed of the same horses, he was
actually compelled to apply his whip in no very gentle manner before he
could induce them to start; and even then all that could be obtained
from the celebrated "dappled grays," now changed into a couple of dull,
sluggish, stupid brutes, was a slow, pottering pace, kept up with so
much difficulty that Madame de Villefort was more than two hours
returning to her residence in the Faubourg Saint-Honoré.


Scarcely had the first congratulations upon her marvellous escape been
gone through when she wrote the following letter to Madame Danglars:--

"Dear Hermine,--I have just had a wonderful escape from the most
imminent danger, and I owe my safety to the very Count of Monte Cristo
we were talking about yesterday, but whom I little expected to see
today. I remember how unmercifully I laughed at what I considered your
eulogistic and exaggerated praises of him; but I have now ample cause to
admit that your enthusiastic description of this wonderful man fell far
short of his merits. Your horses got as far as Ranelagh, when they
darted forward like mad things, and galloped away at so fearful a rate,
that there seemed no other prospect for myself and my poor Edward but
that of being dashed to pieces against the first object that impeded
their progress, when a strange-looking man,--an Arab, a negro, or a
Nubian, at least a black of some nation or other--at a signal from the
count, whose domestic he is, suddenly seized and stopped the infuriated
animals, even at the risk of being trampled to death himself; and
certainly he must have had a most wonderful escape. The count then
hastened to us, and took us into his house, where he speedily recalled
my poor Edward to life. He sent us home in his own carriage. Yours will
be returned to you tomorrow. You will find your horses in bad condition,
from the results of this accident; they seem thoroughly stupefied, as if
sulky and vexed at having been conquered by man. The count, however, has
commissioned me to assure you that two or three days' rest, with plenty
of barley for their sole food during that time, will bring them back to
as fine, that is as terrifying, a condition as they were in yesterday.
Adieu! I cannot return you many thanks for the drive of yesterday; but,
after all, I ought not to blame you for the misconduct of your horses,
more especially as it procured me the pleasure of an introduction to the
Count of Monte Cristo,--and certainly that illustrious personage, apart
from the millions he is said to be so very anxious to dispose of, seemed
to me one of those curiously interesting problems I, for one, delight in
solving at any risk, even if it were to necessitate another drive to the
Bois behind your horses. Edward endured the accident with miraculous
courage--he did not utter a single cry, but fell lifeless into my arms;
nor did a tear fall from his eyes after it was over. I doubt not you
will consider these praises the result of blind maternal affection, but
there is a soul of iron in that delicate, fragile body. Valentine sends
many affectionate remembrances to your dear Eugénie. I embrace you with
all my heart.


Héloïse de Villefort.

P.S.--Do pray contrive some means for me to meet the Count of Monte
Cristo at your house. I must and will see him again. I have just made M.
de Villefort promise to call on him, and I hope the visit will be
returned.

That night the adventure at Auteuil was talked of everywhere. Albert
related it to his mother; Château-Renaud recounted it at the Jockey
Club, and Debray detailed it at length in the salons of the minister;
even Beauchamp accorded twenty lines in his journal to the relation of
the count's courage and gallantry, thereby celebrating him as the
greatest hero of the day in the eyes of all the feminine members of the
aristocracy. Vast was the crowd of visitors and inquiring friends who
left their names at the residence of Madame de Villefort, with the
design of renewing their visit at the right moment, of hearing from her
lips all the interesting circumstances of this most romantic adventure.

As for M. de Villefort, he fulfilled the predictions of Héloïse to the
letter,--donned his dress suit, drew on a pair of white gloves, ordered
the servants to attend the carriage dressed in their full livery, and
drove that same night to No. 30 in the Avenue des Champs-Élysées.



VOLUME THREE



Chapter 48. Ideology

If the Count of Monte Cristo had been for a long time familiar with the
ways of Parisian society, he would have appreciated better the
significance of the step which M. de Villefort had taken. Standing well
at court, whether the king regnant was of the older or younger branch,
whether the government was doctrinaire liberal, or conservative; looked
upon by all as a man of talent, since those who have never experienced a
political check are generally so regarded; hated by many, but warmly
supported by others, without being really liked by anybody, M. de
Villefort held a high position in the magistracy, and maintained his
eminence like a Harlay or a Molé. His drawing-room, under the
regenerating influence of a young wife and a daughter by his first
marriage, scarcely eighteen, was still one of the well-regulated Paris
salons where the worship of traditional customs and the observance of
rigid etiquette were carefully maintained. A freezing politeness, a
strict fidelity to government principles, a profound contempt for
theories and theorists, a deep-seated hatred of ideality,--these were
the elements of private and public life displayed by M. de Villefort.


M. de Villefort was not only a magistrate, he was almost a diplomatist.
His Relations with the former court, of which he always spoke with
dignity and respect, made him respected by the new one, and he knew so
many things, that not only was he always carefully considered, but
sometimes consulted. Perhaps this would not have been so had it been
possible to get rid of M. de Villefort; but, like the feudal barons who
rebelled against their sovereign, he dwelt in an impregnable fortress.
This fortress was his post as king's attorney, all the advantages of
which he exploited with marvellous skill, and which he would not have
resigned but to be made deputy, and thus to replace neutrality by
opposition. Ordinarily M. de Villefort made and returned very few
visits. His wife visited for him, and this was the received thing in the
world, where the weighty and multifarious occupations of the magistrate
were accepted as an excuse for what was really only calculated pride, a
manifestation of professed superiority--in fact, the application of the
axiom, _Pretend to think well of yourself, and the world will think well
of you_, an axiom a hundred times more useful in society nowadays than
that of the Greeks, "Know thyself," a knowledge for which, in our days,
we have substituted the less difficult and more advantageous science of
_knowing others_.

To his friends M. de Villefort was a powerful protector; to his enemies,
he was a silent, but bitter opponent; for those who were neither the one
nor the other, he was a statue of the law-made man. He had a haughty
bearing, a look either steady and impenetrable or insolently piercing
and inquisitorial. Four successive revolutions had built and cemented
the pedestal upon which his fortune was based. M. de Villefort had the
reputation of being the least curious and the least wearisome man in
France. He gave a ball every year, at which he appeared for a quarter of
an hour only,--that is to say, five and forty minutes less than the king
is visible at his balls. He was never seen at the theatres, at concerts,
or in any place of public resort. Occasionally, but seldom, he played at
whist, and then care was taken to select partners worthy of him--
sometimes they were ambassadors, sometimes archbishops, or sometimes a
prince, or a president, or some dowager duchess. Such was the man whose
carriage had just now stopped before the Count of Monte Cristo's door.
The valet de chambre announced M. de Villefort at the moment when the
count, leaning over a large table, was tracing on a map the route from
St. Petersburg to China.

The procureur entered with the same grave and measured step he would
have employed in entering a court of justice. He was the same man, or
rather the development of the same man, whom we have heretofore seen as
assistant attorney at Marseilles. Nature, according to her way, had made
no deviation in the path he had marked out for himself. From being
slender he had now become meagre; once pale, he was now yellow; his
deep-set eyes were hollow, and the gold spectacles shielding his eyes
seemed to be an integral portion of his face. He dressed entirely in
black, with the exception of his white tie, and his funeral appearance
was only mitigated by the slight line of red ribbon which passed almost
imperceptibly through his button-hole, and appeared like a streak of
blood traced with a delicate brush. Although master of himself, Monte
Cristo, scrutinized with irrepressible curiosity the magistrate whose
salute he returned, and who, distrustful by habit, and especially
incredulous as to social prodigies, was much more despised to look upon
"the noble stranger," as Monte Cristo was already called, as an
adventurer in search of new fields, or an escaped criminal, rather than
as a prince of the Holy See, or a sultan of the Thousand and One Nights.

"Sir," said Villefort, in the squeaky tone assumed by magistrates in
their oratorical periods, and of which they cannot, or will not, divest
themselves in society, "sir, the signal service which you yesterday
rendered to my wife and son has made it a duty for me to offer you my
thanks. I have come, therefore, to discharge this duty, and to express
to you my overwhelming gratitude." And as he said this, the "eye severe"
of the magistrate had lost nothing of its habitual arrogance. He spoke
in a voice of the procureur-general, with the rigid inflexibility of
neck and shoulders which caused his flatterers to say (as we have before
observed) that he was the living statue of the law.

"Monsieur," replied the count, with a chilling air, "I am very happy to
have been the means of preserving a son to his mother, for they say that
the sentiment of maternity is the most holy of all; and the good fortune
which occurred to me, monsieur, might have enabled you to dispense with
a duty which, in its discharge, confers an undoubtedly great honor; for
I am aware that M. de Villefort is not usually lavish of the favor which
he now bestows on me,--a favor which, however estimable, is unequal to
the satisfaction which I have in my own consciousness." Villefort,
astonished at this reply, which he by no means expected, started like a
soldier who feels the blow levelled at him over the armor he wears, and
a curl of his disdainful lip indicated that from that moment he noted in
the tablets of his brain that the Count of Monte Cristo was by no means
a highly bred gentleman. He glanced around, in order to seize on
