arithmetic, the only point on which he would have stood firm against the
world, even against M. Morrel; and strong in the multiplication-table,
which he had at his fingers' ends, no matter what scheme or what trap
was laid to catch him. In the midst of the disasters that befell the
house, Cocles was the only one unmoved. But this did not arise from a
want of affection; on the contrary, from a firm conviction. Like the
rats that one by one forsake the doomed ship even before the vessel
weighs anchor, so all the numerous clerks had by degrees deserted the
office and the warehouse. Cocles had seen them go without thinking of
inquiring the cause of their departure. Everything was as we have said,
a question of arithmetic to Cocles, and during twenty years he had
always seen all payments made with such exactitude, that it seemed as
impossible to him that the house should stop payment, as it would to a
miller that the river that had so long turned his mill should cease to
flow.

Nothing had as yet occurred to shake Cocles' belief; the last month's
payment had been made with the most scrupulous exactitude; Cocles had
detected an overbalance of fourteen sous in his cash, and the same
evening he had brought them to M. Morrel, who, with a melancholy smile,
threw them into an almost empty drawer, saying:

"Thanks, Cocles; you are the pearl of cashiers."

Cocles went away perfectly happy, for this eulogium of M. Morrel,
himself the pearl of the honest men of Marseilles, flattered him more
than a present of fifty crowns. But since the end of the month M. Morrel
had passed many an anxious hour. In order to meet the payments then due;
he had collected all his resources, and, fearing lest the report of his
distress should get bruited abroad at Marseilles when he was known to be
reduced to such an extremity, he went to the Beaucaire fair to sell his
wife's and daughter's jewels and a portion of his plate. By this means
the end of the month was passed, but his resources were now exhausted.
Credit, owing to the reports afloat, was no longer to be had; and to
meet the one hundred thousand francs due on the 10th of the present
month, and the one hundred thousand francs due on the 15th of the next
month to M. de Boville, M. Morrel had, in reality, no hope but the
return of the _Pharaon_, of whose departure he had learnt from a vessel
which had weighed anchor at the same time, and which had already arrived
in harbor. But this vessel which, like the _Pharaon_, came from
Calcutta, had been in for a fortnight, while no intelligence had been
received of the _Pharaon_.


Such was the state of affairs when, the day after his interview with M.
de Boville, the confidential clerk of the house of Thomson & French of
Rome, presented himself at M. Morrel's. Emmanuel received him; this
young man was alarmed by the appearance of every new face, for every new
face might be that of a new creditor, come in anxiety to question the
head of the house. The young man, wishing to spare his employer the pain
of this interview, questioned the new-comer; but the stranger declared
that he had nothing to say to M. Emmanuel, and that his business was
with M. Morrel in person. Emmanuel sighed, and summoned Cocles. Cocles
appeared, and the young man bade him conduct the stranger to M. Morrel's
apartment. Cocles went first, and the stranger followed him. On the
staircase they met a beautiful girl of sixteen or seventeen, who looked
with anxiety at the stranger.

"M. Morrel is in his room, is he not, Mademoiselle Julie?" said the
cashier.

"Yes; I think so, at least," said the young girl hesitatingly. "Go and
see, Cocles, and if my father is there, announce this gentleman."

"It will be useless to announce me, mademoiselle," returned the
Englishman. "M. Morrel does not know my name; this worthy gentleman has
only to announce the confidential clerk of the house of Thomson & French
of Rome, with whom your father does business."

The young girl turned pale and continued to descend, while the stranger
and Cocles continued to mount the staircase. She entered the office
where Emmanuel was, while Cocles, by the aid of a key he possessed,
opened a door in the corner of a landing-place on the second staircase,
conducted the stranger into an antechamber, opened a second door, which
he closed behind him, and after having left the clerk of the house of
Thomson & French alone, returned and signed to him that he could enter.
The Englishman entered, and found Morrel seated at a table, turning over
the formidable columns of his ledger, which contained the list of his
liabilities. At the sight of the stranger, M. Morrel closed the ledger,
arose, and offered a seat to the stranger; and when he had seen him
seated, resumed his own chair. Fourteen years had changed the worthy
merchant, who, in his thirty-sixth year at the opening of this history,
was now in his fiftieth; his hair had turned white, time and sorrow had
ploughed deep furrows on his brow, and his look, once so firm and
penetrating, was now irresolute and wandering, as if he feared being
forced to fix his attention on some particular thought or person. The
Englishman looked at him with an air of curiosity, evidently mingled
with interest. "Monsieur," said Morrel, whose uneasiness was increased
by this examination, "you wish to speak to me?"

"Yes, monsieur; you are aware from whom I come?"

"The house of Thomson & French; at least, so my cashier tells me."

"He has told you rightly. The house of Thomson & French had 300,000 or
400,000 francs to pay this month in France; and, knowing your strict
punctuality, have collected all the bills bearing your signature, and
charged me as they became due to present them, and to employ the money
otherwise." Morrel sighed deeply, and passed his hand over his forehead,
which was covered with perspiration.

"So then, sir," said Morrel, "you hold bills of mine?"

"Yes, and for a considerable sum."

"What is the amount?" asked Morrel with a voice he strove to render
firm.

"Here is," said the Englishman, taking a quantity of papers from his
pocket, "an assignment of 200,000 francs to our house by M. de Boville,
the inspector of prisons, to whom they are due. You acknowledge, of
course, that you owe this sum to him?"


"Yes; he placed the money in my hands at four and a half per cent nearly
five years ago."

"When are you to pay?"

"Half the 15th of this month, half the 15th of next."

"Just so; and now here are 32,500 francs payable shortly; they are all
signed by you, and assigned to our house by the holders."

"I recognize them," said Morrel, whose face was suffused, as he thought
that, for the first time in his life, he would be unable to honor his
own signature. "Is this all?"

"No, I have for the end of the month these bills which have been
assigned to us by the house of Pascal, and the house of Wild & Turner of
Marseilles, amounting to nearly 55,000. francs; in all, 287,500 francs."
It is impossible to describe what Morrel suffered during this
enumeration. "Two hundred and eighty-seven thousand five hundred
francs," repeated he.

"Yes, sir," replied the Englishman. "I will not," continued he, after a
moment's silence, "conceal from you, that while your probity and
exactitude up to this moment are universally acknowledged, yet the
report is current in Marseilles that you are not able to meet your
liabilities." At this almost brutal speech Morrel turned deathly pale.
"Sir," said he, "up to this time--and it is now more than four-and-
twenty years since I received the direction of this house from my
father, who had himself conducted it for five and thirty years--never
has anything bearing the signature of Morrel & Son been dishonored."

"I know that," replied the Englishman. "But as a man of honor should
answer another, tell me fairly, shall you pay these with the same
punctuality?" Morrel shuddered, and looked at the man, who spoke with
more assurance than he had hitherto shown. "To questions frankly put,"
said he, "a straightforward answer should be given. Yes, I shall pay,
if, as I hope, my vessel arrives safely; for its arrival will again
procure me the credit which the numerous accidents, of which I have been
the victim, have deprived me; but if the _Pharaon_ should be lost, and
this last resource be gone----"

The poor man's eyes filled with tears.

"Well," said the other, "if this last resource fail you?"

"Well," returned Morrel, "it is a cruel thing to be forced to say, but,
already used to misfortune, I must habituate myself to shame. I fear I
shall be forced to suspend payment."

"Have you no friends who could assist you?" Morrel smiled mournfully.
"In business, sir," said he, "one has no friends, only correspondents."

"It is true," murmured the Englishman; "then you have but one hope."

"But one."

"The last?"

"The last."

"So that if this fail----"

"I am ruined,--completely ruined!"

"As I was on my way here, a vessel was coming into port."

"I know it, sir; a young man, who still adheres to my fallen fortunes,
passes a part of his time in a belvidere at the top of the house, in
hopes of being the first to announce good news to me; he has informed me
of the arrival of this ship."

"And it is not yours?"

"No, she is a Bordeaux vessel, _La Gironde_; she comes from India also;
but she is not mine."

"Perhaps she has spoken to the _Pharaon_, and brings you some tidings of
her?"

"Shall I tell you plainly one thing, sir? I dread almost as much to
receive any tidings of my vessel as to remain in doubt. Uncertainty is
still hope." Then in a low voice Morrel added,--"This delay is not
natural. The _Pharaon_ left Calcutta the 5th of February; she ought to
have been here a month ago."

"What is that?" said the Englishman. "What is the meaning of that
