yes, that is it."

"Ah!" said Eugénie.

"Yes, ruined! Now it is revealed, this secret so full of horror, as the
tragic poet says. Now, my daughter, learn from my lips how you may
alleviate this misfortune, so far as it will affect you."

"Oh," cried Eugénie, "you are a bad physiognomist, if you imagine I
deplore on my own account the catastrophe of which you warn me. I
ruined? and what will that signify to me? Have I not my talent left? Can
I not, like Pasta, Malibran, Grisi, acquire for myself what you would
never have given me, whatever might have been your fortune, a hundred or
a hundred and fifty thousand livres per annum, for which I shall be
indebted to no one but myself; and which, instead of being given as you
gave me those poor twelve thousand francs, with sour looks and
reproaches for my prodigality, will be accompanied with acclamations,
with bravos, and with flowers? And if I do not possess that talent,
which your smiles prove to me you doubt, should I not still have that
ardent love of independence, which will be a substitute for wealth, and
which in my mind supersedes even the instinct of self-preservation? No,
I grieve not on my own account, I shall always find a resource; my
books, my pencils, my piano, all the things which cost but little, and
which I shall be able to procure, will remain my own.

"Do you think that I sorrow for Madame Danglars? Undeceive yourself
again; either I am greatly mistaken, or she has provided against the
catastrophe which threatens you, and, which will pass over without
affecting her. She has taken care for herself,--at least I hope so,--for
her attention has not been diverted from her projects by watching over
me. She has fostered my independence by professedly indulging my love
for liberty. Oh, no, sir; from my childhood I have seen too much, and
understood too much, of what has passed around me, for misfortune to
have an undue power over me. From my earliest recollections, I have been
beloved by no one--so much the worse; that has naturally led me to love
no one--so much the better--now you have my profession of faith."

"Then," said Danglars, pale with anger, which was not at all due to
offended paternal love,--"then, mademoiselle, you persist in your
determination to accelerate my ruin?"

"Your ruin? I accelerate your ruin? What do you mean? I do not
understand you."

"So much the better, I have a ray of hope left; listen."

"I am all attention," said Eugénie, looking so earnestly at her father
that it was an effort for the latter to endure her unrelenting gaze.

"M. Cavalcanti," continued Danglars, "is about to marry you, and will
place in my hands his fortune, amounting to three million livres."

"That is admirable!" said Eugénie with sovereign contempt, smoothing her
gloves out one upon the other.

"You think I shall deprive you of those three millions," said Danglars;
"but do not fear it. They are destined to produce at least ten. I and a
brother banker have obtained a grant of a railway, the only industrial
enterprise which in these days promises to make good the fabulous
prospects that Law once held out to the eternally deluded Parisians, in
the fantastic Mississippi scheme. As I look at it, a millionth part of a
railway is worth fully as much as an acre of waste land on the banks of
the Ohio. We make in our case a deposit, on a mortgage, which is an
advance, as you see, since we gain at least ten, fifteen, twenty, or a
hundred livres' worth of iron in exchange for our money. Well, within a
week I am to deposit four millions for my share; the four millions, I
promise you, will produce ten or twelve."

"But during my visit to you the day before yesterday, sir, which you
appear to recollect so well," replied Eugénie, "I saw you arranging a
deposit--is not that the term?--of five millions and a half; you even
pointed it out to me in two drafts on the treasury, and you were
astonished that so valuable a paper did not dazzle my eyes like
lightning."

"Yes, but those five millions and a half are not mine, and are only a
proof of the great confidence placed in me; my title of popular banker
has gained me the confidence of charitable institutions, and the five
millions and a half belong to them; at any other time I should not have
hesitated to make use of them, but the great losses I have recently
sustained are well known, and, as I told you, my credit is rather
shaken. That deposit may be at any moment withdrawn, and if I had
employed it for another purpose, I should bring on me a disgraceful
bankruptcy. I do not despise bankruptcies, believe me, but they must be
those which enrich, not those which ruin. Now, if you marry M.
Cavalcanti, and I get the three millions, or even if it is thought I am
going to get them, my credit will be restored, and my fortune, which for
the last month or two has been swallowed up in gulfs which have been
opened in my path by an inconceivable fatality, will revive. Do you
understand me?"

"Perfectly; you pledge me for three millions, do you not?"

"The greater the amount, the more flattering it is to you; it gives you
an idea of your value."

"Thank you. One word more, sir; do you promise me to make what use you
can of the report of the fortune M. Cavalcanti will bring without
touching the money? This is no act of selfishness, but of delicacy. I am
willing to help rebuild your fortune, but I will not be an accomplice in
the ruin of others."

"But since I tell you," cried Danglars, "that with these three million--
--"

"Do you expect to recover your position, sir, without touching those
three million?"

"I hope so, if the marriage should take place and confirm my credit."

"Shall you be able to pay M. Cavalcanti the five hundred thousand francs
you promise for my dowry?"

"He shall receive them on returning from the mayor's." [*]


* The performance of the civil marriage.

"Very well!"

"What next? what more do you want?"

"I wish to know if, in demanding my signature, you leave me entirely
free in my person?"

"Absolutely."

"Then, as I said before, sir,--very well; I am ready to marry M.
Cavalcanti."

"But what are you up to?"

"Ah, that is my affair. What advantage should I have over you, if
knowing your secret I were to tell you mine?"

Danglars bit his lips. "Then," said he, "you are ready to pay the
official visits, which are absolutely indispensable?"

"Yes," replied Eugénie.

"And to sign the contract in three days?"

"Yes."

"Then, in my turn, I also say, very well!" Danglars pressed his
daughter's hand in his. But, extraordinary to relate, the father did not
say, "Thank you, my child," nor did the daughter smile at her father.

"Is the conference ended?" asked Eugénie, rising.

Danglars motioned that he had nothing more to say. Five minutes
afterwards the piano resounded to the touch of Mademoiselle d'Armilly's
fingers, and Mademoiselle Danglars was singing Brabantio's malediction
on Desdemona. At the end of the piece Étienne entered, and announced to
Eugénie that the horses were to the carriage, and that the baroness was
waiting for her to pay her visits. We have seen them at Villefort's;
they proceeded then on their course.



VOLUME FIVE



Chapter 96. The Contract

Three days after the scene we have just described, namely towards five
o'clock in the afternoon of the day fixed for the signature of the
contract between Mademoiselle Eugénie Danglars and Andrea Cavalcanti,--
whom the banker persisted in calling prince,--a fresh breeze was
stirring the leaves in the little garden in front of the Count of Monte
Cristo's house, and the count was preparing to go out. While his horses
were impatiently pawing the ground,--held in by the coachman, who had
been seated a quarter of an hour on his box,--the elegant phaeton with
which we are familiar rapidly turned the angle of the entrance-gate, and
cast out on the doorsteps M. Andrea Cavalcanti, as decked up and gay as
if he were going to marry a princess. He inquired after the count with
his usual familiarity, and ascending lightly to the first story met him
at the top of the stairs. The count stopped on seeing the young man. As
for Andrea, he was launched, and when he was once launched nothing
stopped him.

"Ah, good morning, my dear count," said he.

"Ah, M. Andrea," said the latter, with his half-jesting tone; "how do
you do?"

"Charmingly, as you see. I am come to talk to you about a thousand
things; but, first tell me, were you going out or just returned?"

"I was going out, sir."

"Then, in order not to hinder you, I will get up with you if you please
in your carriage, and Tom shall follow with my phaeton in tow."

"No," said the count, with an imperceptible smile of contempt, for he
had no wish to be seen in the young man's society,--"no; I prefer
listening to you here, my dear M. Andrea; we can chat better in-doors,
and there is no coachman to overhear our conversation." The count
returned to a small drawing-room on the first floor, sat down, and
