
"Well, you would do much better to find him a jacket and a pair of
trousers, if you have them."

"No," said Jacopo; "but I have a shirt and a pair of trousers."

"That is all I want," interrupted Dantès. Jacopo dived into the hold and
soon returned with what Edmond wanted.

"Now, then, do you wish for anything else?" said the patron.

"A piece of bread and another glass of the capital rum I tasted, for I
have not eaten or drunk for a long time." He had not tasted food for
forty hours. A piece of bread was brought, and Jacopo offered him the
gourd.

"Larboard your helm," cried the captain to the steersman. Dantès glanced
that way as he lifted the gourd to his mouth; then paused with hand in
mid-air.

"Hollo! what's the matter at the Château d'If?" said the captain.

A small white cloud, which had attracted Dantès' attention, crowned the
summit of the bastion of the Château d'If. At the same moment the faint
report of a gun was heard. The sailors looked at one another.

"What is this?" asked the captain.

"A prisoner has escaped from the Château d'If, and they are firing the
alarm gun," replied Dantès. The captain glanced at him, but he had
lifted the rum to his lips and was drinking it with so much composure,
that suspicions, if the captain had any, died away.


"Pretty strong rum! " said Dantès, wiping his brow with his sleeve.

"At any rate," murmured he, "if it be, so much the better, for I have
made a rare acquisition." Under pretence of being fatigued, Dantès asked
to take the helm; the steersman, glad to be relieved, looked at the
captain, and the latter by a sign indicated that he might abandon it to
his new comrade. Dantès could thus keep his eyes on Marseilles.

"What is the day of the month?" asked he of Jacopo, who sat down beside
him.

"The 28th of February."

"In what year?"

"In what year--you ask me in what year?"

"Yes," replied the young man, "I ask you in what year!"

"You have forgotten then?"

"I got such a fright last night," replied Dantès, smiling, "that I have
almost lost my memory. I ask you what year is it?"

"The year 1829," returned Jacopo. It was fourteen years, day for day,
since Dantès' arrest. He was nineteen when he entered the Château d'If;
he was thirty-three when he escaped. A sorrowful smile passed over his
face; he asked himself what had become of Mercédès, who must believe him
dead. Then his eyes lighted up with hatred as he thought of the three
men who had caused him so long and wretched a captivity. He renewed
against Danglars, Fernand, and Villefort the oath of implacable
vengeance he had made in his dungeon. This oath was no longer a vain
menace; for the fastest sailor in the Mediterranean would have been
unable to overtake the little tartan, that with every stitch of canvas
set was flying before the wind to Leghorn.



Chapter 22. The Smugglers

Dantes had not been a day on board before he had a very clear idea of
the men with whom his lot had been cast. Without having been in the
school of the Abbé Faria, the worthy master of _La Jeune Amélie_ (the
name of the Genoese tartan) knew a smattering of all the tongues spoken
on the shores of that large lake called the Mediterranean, from the
Arabic to the Provençal, and this, while it spared him interpreters,
persons always troublesome and frequently indiscreet, gave him great
facilities of communication, either with the vessels he met at sea, with
the small boats sailing along the coast, or with the people without
name, country, or occupation, who are always seen on the quays of
seaports, and who live by hidden and mysterious means which we must
suppose to be a direct gift of providence, as they have no visible means
of support. It is fair to assume that Dantès was on board a smuggler.

At first the captain had received Dantès on board with a certain degree
of distrust. He was very well known to the customs officers of the
coast; and as there was between these worthies and himself a perpetual
battle of wits, he had at first thought that Dantès might be an emissary
of these industrious guardians of rights and duties, who perhaps
employed this ingenious means of learning some of the secrets of his
trade. But the skilful manner in which Dantès had handled the lugger had
entirely reassured him; and then, when he saw the light plume of smoke
floating above the bastion of the Château d'If, and heard the distant
report, he was instantly struck with the idea that he had on board his
vessel one whose coming and going, like that of kings, was accompanied
with salutes of artillery. This made him less uneasy, it must be owned,
than if the new-comer had proved to be a customs officer; but this
supposition also disappeared like the first, when he beheld the perfect
tranquillity of his recruit.

Edmond thus had the advantage of knowing what the owner was, without the
owner knowing who he was; and however the old sailor and his crew tried
to "pump" him, they extracted nothing more from him; he gave accurate
descriptions of Naples and Malta, which he knew as well as Marseilles,
and held stoutly to his first story. Thus the Genoese, subtle as he was,
was duped by Edmond, in whose favor his mild demeanor, his nautical
skill, and his admirable dissimulation, pleaded. Moreover, it is
possible that the Genoese was one of those shrewd persons who know
nothing but what they should know, and believe nothing but what they
should believe.

In this state of mutual understanding, they reached Leghorn. Here Edmond
was to undergo another trial; he was to find out whether he could
recognize himself, as he had not seen his own face for fourteen years.
He had preserved a tolerably good remembrance of what the youth had
been, and was now to find out what the man had become. His comrades
believed that his vow was fulfilled. As he had twenty times touched at
Leghorn, he remembered a barber in St. Ferdinand Street; he went there
to have his beard and hair cut. The barber gazed in amazement at this
man with the long, thick and black hair and beard, which gave his head
the appearance of one of Titian's portraits. At this period it was not
the fashion to wear so large a beard and hair so long; now a barber
would only be surprised if a man gifted with such advantages should
consent voluntarily to deprive himself of them. The Leghorn barber said
nothing and went to work.

When the operation was concluded, and Edmond felt that his chin was
completely smooth, and his hair reduced to its usual length, he asked
for a hand-glass. He was now, as we have said, three-and-thirty years of
age, and his fourteen years' imprisonment had produced a great
transformation in his appearance. Dantès had entered the Château d'If
with the round, open, smiling face of a young and happy man, with whom
the early paths of life have been smooth, and who anticipates a future
corresponding with his past. This was now all changed. The oval face was
lengthened, his smiling mouth had assumed the firm and marked lines
which betoken resolution; his eyebrows were arched beneath a brow
furrowed with thought; his eyes were full of melancholy, and from their
depths occasionally sparkled gloomy fires of misanthropy and hatred; his
complexion, so long kept from the sun, had now that pale color which
produces, when the features are encircled with black hair, the
aristocratic beauty of the man of the north; the profound learning he
had acquired had besides diffused over his features a refined
intellectual expression; and he had also acquired, being naturally of a
goodly stature, that vigor which a frame possesses which has so long
concentrated all its force within itself.


To the elegance of a nervous and slight form had succeeded the solidity
of a rounded and muscular figure. As to his voice, prayers, sobs, and
imprecations had changed it so that at times it was of a singularly
penetrating sweetness, and at others rough and almost hoarse. Moreover,
from being so long in twilight or darkness, his eyes had acquired the
faculty of distinguishing objects in the night, common to the hyena and
the wolf. Edmond smiled when he beheld himself: it was impossible that
his best friend--if, indeed, he had any friend left--could recognize
him; he could not recognize himself.

The master of _La Jeune Amélie_, who was very desirous of retaining
amongst his crew a man of Edmond's value, had offered to advance him
funds out of his future profits, which Edmond had accepted. His next
care on leaving the barber's who had achieved his first metamorphosis
was to enter a shop and buy a complete sailor's suit--a garb, as we all
know, very simple, and consisting of white trousers, a striped shirt,
and a cap. It was in this costume, and bringing back to Jacopo the shirt
and trousers he had lent him, that Edmond reappeared before the captain
of the lugger, who had made him tell his story over and over again
before he could believe him, or recognize in the neat and trim sailor
the man with thick and matted beard, hair tangled with seaweed, and body
soaking in seabrine, whom he had picked up naked and nearly drowned.
Attracted by his prepossessing appearance, he renewed his offers of an
engagement to Dantès; but Dantès, who had his own projects, would not
agree for a longer time than three months.

_La Jeune Amélie_ had a very active crew, very obedient to their
captain, who lost as little time as possible. He had scarcely been a
week at Leghorn before the hold of his vessel was filled with printed
muslins, contraband cottons, English powder, and tobacco on which the
excise had forgotten to put its mark. The master was to get all this out
of Leghorn free of duties, and land it on the shores of Corsica, where
certain speculators undertook to forward the cargo to France. They
sailed; Edmond was again cleaving the azure sea which had been the first
horizon of his youth, and which he had so often dreamed of in prison. He
left Gorgone on his right and La Pianosa on his left, and went towards
the country of Paoli and Napoleon. The next morning going on deck, as he
always did at an early hour, the patron found Dantès leaning against the
bulwarks gazing with intense earnestness at a pile of granite rocks,
which the rising sun tinged with rosy light. It was the Island of Monte
Cristo. _La Jeune Amélie_ left it three-quarters of a league to the
larboard and kept on for Corsica.

Dantès thought, as they passed so closely to the island whose name was
so interesting to him, that he had only to leap into the sea and in half
an hour be at the promised land. But then what could he do without
instruments to discover his treasure, without arms to defend himself?
Besides, what would the sailors say? What would the patron think? He
must wait.
