fresh air and the shame he felt at having exposed himself before his
servants, partly recalled his senses, but the ride was short, and as he
drew near his house all his wretchedness revived. He stopped at a short
distance from the house and alighted.

The door was wide open, a hackney-coach was standing in the middle of
the yard--a strange sight before so noble a mansion; the count looked at
it with terror, but without daring to inquire its meaning, he rushed
towards his apartment. Two persons were coming down the stairs; he had
only time to creep into an alcove to avoid them. It was Mercédès leaning
on her son's arm and leaving the house. They passed close by the unhappy
being, who, concealed behind the damask curtain, almost felt Mercédès
dress brush past him, and his son's warm breath, pronouncing these
words,--"Courage, mother! Come, this is no longer our home!" The words
died away, the steps were lost in the distance. The general drew himself
up, clinging to the curtain; he uttered the most dreadful sob which ever
escaped from the bosom of a father abandoned at the same time by his
wife and son. He soon heard the clatter of the iron step of the hackney-
coach, then the coachman's voice, and then the rolling of the heavy
vehicle shook the windows. He darted to his bedroom to see once more all
he had loved in the world; but the hackney-coach drove on and the head
of neither Mercédès nor her son appeared at the window to take a last
look at the house or the deserted father and husband. And at the very
moment when the wheels of that coach crossed the gateway a report was
heard, and a thick smoke escaped through one of the panes of the window,
which was broken by the explosion.



Chapter 93. Valentine

We may easily conceive where Morrel's appointment was. On leaving Monte
Cristo he walked slowly towards Villefort's; we say slowly, for Morrel
had more than half an hour to spare to go five hundred steps, but he had
hastened to take leave of Monte Cristo because he wished to be alone
with his thoughts. He knew his time well--the hour when Valentine was
giving Noirtier his breakfast, and was sure not to be disturbed in the
performance of this pious duty. Noirtier and Valentine had given him
leave to go twice a week, and he was now availing himself of that
permission. He had arrived; Valentine was expecting him. Uneasy and
almost crazed, she seized his hand and led him to her grandfather. This
uneasiness, amounting almost to frenzy, arose from the report Morcerf's
adventure had made in the world, for the affair at the Opera was
generally known. No one at Villefort's doubted that a duel would ensue
from it. Valentine, with her woman's instinct, guessed that Morrel would
be Monte Cristo's second, and from the young man's well-known courage
and his great affection for the count, she feared that he would not
content himself with the passive part assigned to him. We may easily
understand how eagerly the particulars were asked for, given, and
received; and Morrel could read an indescribable joy in the eyes of his
beloved, when she knew that the termination of this affair was as happy
as it was unexpected.

"Now," said Valentine, motioning to Morrel to sit down near her
grandfather, while she took her seat on his footstool,--"now let us talk
about our own affairs. You know, Maximilian, grandpapa once thought of
leaving this house, and taking an apartment away from M. de
Villefort's."

"Yes," said Maximilian, "I recollect the project, of which I highly
approved."

"Well," said Valentine, "you may approve again, for grandpapa is again
thinking of it."

"Bravo," said Maximilian.


"And do you know," said Valentine, "what reason grandpapa gives for
leaving this house." Noirtier looked at Valentine to impose silence, but
she did not notice him; her looks, her eyes, her smile, were all for
Morrel.

"Oh, whatever may be M. Noirtier's reason," answered Morrel, "I can
readily believe it to be a good one."

"An excellent one," said Valentine. "He pretends the air of the Faubourg
Saint-Honoré is not good for me."

"Indeed?" said Morrel; "in that M. Noirtier may be right; you have not
seemed to be well for the last fortnight."

"Not very," said Valentine. "And grandpapa has become my physician, and
I have the greatest confidence in him, because he knows everything."

"Do you then really suffer?" asked Morrel quickly.

"Oh, it must not be called suffering; I feel a general uneasiness, that
is all. I have lost my appetite, and my stomach feels as if it were
struggling to get accustomed to something." Noirtier did not lose a word
of what Valentine said. "And what treatment do you adopt for this
singular complaint?"

"A very simple one," said Valentine. "I swallow every morning a spoonful
of the mixture prepared for my grandfather. When I say one spoonful, I
began by one--now I take four. Grandpapa says it is a panacea."
Valentine smiled, but it was evident that she suffered.

Maximilian, in his devotedness, gazed silently at her. She was very
beautiful, but her usual pallor had increased; her eyes were more
brilliant than ever, and her hands, which were generally white like
mother-of-pearl, now more resembled wax, to which time was adding a
yellowish hue. From Valentine the young man looked towards Noirtier. The
latter watched with strange and deep interest the young girl, absorbed
by her affection, and he also, like Morrel, followed those traces of
inward suffering which was so little perceptible to a common observer
that they escaped the notice of everyone but the grandfather and the
lover.

"But," said Morrel, "I thought this mixture, of which you now take four
spoonfuls, was prepared for M. Noirtier?"

"I know it is very bitter," said Valentine; "so bitter, that all I drink
afterwards appears to have the same taste." Noirtier looked inquiringly
at his granddaughter. "Yes, grandpapa," said Valentine; "it is so. Just
now, before I came down to you, I drank a glass of sugared water; I left
half, because it seemed so bitter." Noirtier turned pale, and made a
sign that he wished to speak. Valentine rose to fetch the dictionary.
Noirtier watched her with evident anguish. In fact, the blood was
rushing to the young girl's head already, her cheeks were becoming red.
"Oh," cried she, without losing any of her cheerfulness, "this is
singular! I can't see! Did the sun shine in my eyes?" And she leaned
against the window.

"The sun is not shining," said Morrel, more alarmed by Noirtier's
expression than by Valentine's indisposition. He ran towards her. The
young girl smiled. "Cheer up," said she to Noirtier. "Do not be alarmed,
Maximilian; it is nothing, and has already passed away. But listen! Do I
not hear a carriage in the courtyard?" She opened Noirtier's door, ran
to a window in the passage, and returned hastily. "Yes," said she, "it
is Madame Danglars and her daughter, who have come to call on us. Good-
bye;--I must run away, for they would send here for me, or, rather,
farewell till I see you again. Stay with grandpapa, Maximilian; I
promise you not to persuade them to stay."


Morrel watched her as she left the room; he heard her ascend the little
staircase which led both to Madame de Villefort's apartments and to
hers. As soon as she was gone, Noirtier made a sign to Morrel to take
the dictionary. Morrel obeyed; guided by Valentine, he had learned how
to understand the old man quickly. Accustomed, however, as he was to the
work, he had to repeat most of the letters of the alphabet and to find
every word in the dictionary, so that it was ten minutes before the
thought of the old man was translated by these words, "Fetch the glass
of water and the decanter from Valentine's room."

Morrel rang immediately for the servant who had taken Barrois's
situation, and in Noirtier's name gave that order. The servant soon
returned. The decanter and the glass were completely empty. Noirtier
made a sign that he wished to speak. "Why are the glass and decanter
empty?" asked he; "Valentine said she only drank half the glassful." The
translation of this new question occupied another five minutes. "I do
not know," said the servant, "but the housemaid is in Mademoiselle
Valentine's room: perhaps she has emptied them."

"Ask her," said Morrel, translating Noirtier's thought this time by his
look. The servant went out, but returned almost immediately.
"Mademoiselle Valentine passed through the room to go to Madame de
Villefort's," said he; "and in passing, as she was thirsty, she drank
what remained in the glass; as for the decanter, Master Edward had
emptied that to make a pond for his ducks." Noirtier raised his eyes to
heaven, as a gambler does who stakes his all on one stroke. From that
moment the old man's eyes were fixed on the door, and did not quit it.

It was indeed Madame Danglars and her daughter whom Valentine had seen;
they had been ushered into Madame de Villefort's room, who had said she
would receive them there. That is why Valentine passed through her room,
which was on a level with Valentine's, and only separated from it by
Edward's. The two ladies entered the drawing-room with that sort of
official stiffness which preludes a formal communication. Among worldly
people manner is contagious. Madame de Villefort received them with
equal solemnity. Valentine entered at this moment, and the formalities
were resumed. "My dear friend," said the baroness, while the two young
people were shaking hands, "I and Eugénie are come to be the first to
announce to you the approaching marriage of my daughter with Prince
Cavalcanti." Danglars kept up the title of prince. The popular banker
found that it answered better than count. "Allow me to present you my
sincere congratulations," replied Madame de Villefort. "Prince
Cavalcanti appears to be a young man of rare qualities."


"Listen," said the baroness, smiling; "speaking to you as a friend I can
say that the prince does not yet appear all he will be. He has about him
a little of that foreign manner by which French persons recognize, at
first sight, the Italian or German nobleman. Besides, he gives evidence
of great kindness of disposition, much keenness of wit, and as to
suitability, M. Danglars assures me that his fortune is majestic--that
is his word."

"And then," said Eugénie, while turning over the leaves of Madame de
Villefort's album, "add that you have taken a great fancy to the young
man."

"And," said Madame de Villefort, "I need not ask you if you share that
fancy."

"I?" replied Eugénie with her usual candor. "Oh, not the least in the
world, madame! My wish was not to confine myself to domestic cares, or
the caprices of any man, but to be an artist, and consequently free in
heart, in person, and in thought." Eugénie pronounced these words with
