"Oh dear, yes, sir; the abbé's dungeon was forty or fifty feet distant
from that of one of Bonaparte's emissaries,--one of those who had
contributed the most to the return of the usurper in 1815,--a very
resolute and very dangerous man."

"Indeed!" said the Englishman.

"Yes," replied M. de Boville; "I myself had occasion to see this man in
1816 or 1817, and we could only go into his dungeon with a file of
soldiers. That man made a deep impression on me; I shall never forget
his countenance!" The Englishman smiled imperceptibly.


"And you say, sir," he interposed, "that the two dungeons----"

"Were separated by a distance of fifty feet; but it appears that this
Edmond Dantès----"

"This dangerous man's name was----"

"Edmond Dantès. It appears, sir, that this Edmond Dantès had procured
tools, or made them, for they found a tunnel through which the prisoners
held communication with one another."

"This tunnel was dug, no doubt, with an intention of escape?"

"No doubt; but unfortunately for the prisoners, the Abbé Faria had an
attack of catalepsy, and died."

"That must have cut short the projects of escape."

"For the dead man, yes," replied M. de Boville, "but not for the
survivor; on the contrary, this Dantès saw a means of accelerating his
escape. He, no doubt, thought that prisoners who died in the Château
d'If were interred in an ordinary burial-ground, and he conveyed the
dead man into his own cell, took his place in the sack in which they had
sewed up the corpse, and awaited the moment of interment."

"It was a bold step, and one that showed some courage," remarked the
Englishman.

"As I have already told you, sir, he was a very dangerous man; and,
fortunately, by his own act disembarrassed the government of the fears
it had on his account."

"How was that?"

"How? Do you not comprehend?"

"No."

"The Château d'If has no cemetery, and they simply throw the dead into
the sea, after fastening a thirty-six pound cannon-ball to their feet."

"Well?" observed the Englishman as if he were slow of comprehension.

"Well, they fastened a thirty-six pound ball to his feet, and threw him
into the sea."

"Really!" exclaimed the Englishman.

"Yes, sir," continued the inspector of prisons. "You may imagine the
amazement of the fugitive when he found himself flung headlong over the
rocks! I should like to have seen his face at that moment."

"That would have been difficult."

"No matter," replied De Boville, in supreme good-humor at the certainty
of recovering his two hundred thousand francs,--"no matter, I can fancy
it." And he shouted with laughter.

"So can I," said the Englishman, and he laughed too; but he laughed as
the English do, "at the end of his teeth."

"And so," continued the Englishman who first gained his composure, "he
was drowned?"

"Unquestionably."

"So that the governor got rid of the dangerous and the crazy prisoner at
the same time?"

"Precisely."


"But some official document was drawn up as to this affair, I suppose?"
inquired the Englishman.

"Yes, yes, the mortuary deposition. You understand, Dantès' relations,
if he had any, might have some interest in knowing if he were dead or
alive."

"So that now, if there were anything to inherit from him, they may do so
with easy conscience. He is dead, and no mistake about it."

"Oh, yes; and they may have the fact attested whenever they please."

"So be it," said the Englishman. "But to return to these registers."

"True, this story has diverted our attention from them. Excuse me."

"Excuse you for what? For the story? By no means; it really seems to me
very curious."

"Yes, indeed. So, sir, you wish to see all relating to the poor abbé,
who really was gentleness itself."

"Yes, you will much oblige me."

"Go into my study here, and I will show it to you." And they both
entered M. de Boville's study. Everything was here arranged in perfect
order; each register had its number, each file of papers its place. The
inspector begged the Englishman to seat himself in an armchair, and
placed before him the register and documents relative to the Château
d'If, giving him all the time he desired for the examination, while De
Boville seated himself in a corner, and began to read his newspaper. The
Englishman easily found the entries relative to the Abbé Faria; but it
seemed that the history which the inspector had related interested him
greatly, for after having perused the first documents he turned over the
leaves until he reached the deposition respecting Edmond Dantès. There
he found everything arranged in due order,--the accusation, examination,
Morrel's petition, M. de Villefort's marginal notes. He folded up the
accusation quietly, and put it as quietly in his pocket; read the
examination, and saw that the name of Noirtier was not mentioned in it;
perused, too, the application dated 10th April, 1815, in which Morrel,
by the deputy procureur's advice, exaggerated with the best intentions
(for Napoleon was then on the throne) the services Dantès had rendered
to the imperial cause--services which Villefort's certificates rendered
indisputable. Then he saw through the whole thing. This petition to
Napoleon, kept back by Villefort, had become, under the second
restoration, a terrible weapon against him in the hands of the king's
attorney. He was no longer astonished when he searched on to find in the
register this note, placed in a bracket against his name:--

Edmond Dantès.

An inveterate Bonapartist; took an active part in the return from the
Island of Elba.

To be kept in strict solitary confinement, and to be closely watched and
guarded.

Beneath these lines was written in another hand: "See note above--
nothing can be done."

He compared the writing in the bracket with the writing of the
certificate placed beneath Morrel's petition, and discovered that the
note in the bracket was the same writing as the certificate--that is to
say, was in Villefort's handwriting. As to the note which accompanied
this, the Englishman understood that it might have been added by some
inspector who had taken a momentary interest in Dantès' situation, but
who had, from the remarks we have quoted, found it impossible to give
any effect to the interest he had felt.


As we have said, the inspector, from discretion, and that he might not
disturb the Abbé Faria's pupil in his researches, had seated himself in
a corner, and was reading _Le Drapeau Blanc_. He did not see the
Englishman fold up and place in his pocket the accusation written by
Danglars under the arbor of La Réserve, and which had the postmark,
"Marseilles, 27th February, delivery 6 o'clock, P.M." But it must be
said that if he had seen it, he attached so little importance to this
scrap of paper, and so much importance to his two hundred thousand
francs, that he would not have opposed whatever the Englishman might do,
however irregular it might be.

"Thanks," said the latter, closing the register with a slam, "I have all
I want; now it is for me to perform my promise. Give me a simple
assignment of your debt; acknowledge therein the receipt of the cash,
and I will hand you over the money." He rose, gave his seat to M. de
Boville, who took it without ceremony, and quickly drew up the required
assignment, while the Englishman counted out the bank-notes on the other
side of the desk.



Chapter 29. The House of Morrel & Son

Anyone who had quitted Marseilles a few years previously, well
acquainted with the interior of Morrel's warehouse, and had returned at
this date, would have found a great change. Instead of that air of life,
of comfort, and of happiness that permeates a flourishing and prosperous
business establishment--instead of merry faces at the windows, busy
clerks hurrying to and fro in the long corridors--instead of the court
filled with bales of goods, re-echoing with the cries and the jokes of
porters, one would have immediately perceived all aspect of sadness and
gloom. Out of all the numerous clerks that used to fill the deserted
corridor and the empty office, but two remained. One was a young man of
three or four and twenty, who was in love with M. Morrel's daughter, and
had remained with him in spite of the efforts of his friends to induce
him to withdraw; the other was an old one-eyed cashier, called "Cocles,"
or "Cock-eye," a nickname given him by the young men who used to throng
this vast now almost deserted bee-hive, and which had so completely
replaced his real name that he would not, in all probability, have
replied to any one who addressed him by it.

Cocles remained in M. Morrel's service, and a most singular change had
taken place in his position; he had at the same time risen to the rank
of cashier, and sunk to the rank of a servant. He was, however, the same
Cocles, good, patient, devoted, but inflexible on the subject of
