"Well, gentlemen, the reason people die so multitudinously (I like the
word) at M. de Villefort's is that there is an assassin in the house!"
The two young men shuddered, for the same idea had more than once
occurred to them.

"And who is the assassin;" they asked together.

"Young Edward!" A burst of laughter from the auditors did not in the
least disconcert the speaker, who continued,--"Yes, gentlemen; Edward,
the infant phenomenon, who is quite an adept in the art of killing."

"You are jesting."

"Not at all. I yesterday engaged a servant, who had just left M. de
Villefort--I intend sending him away tomorrow, for he eats so
enormously, to make up for the fast imposed upon him by his terror in
that house. Well, now listen."

"We are listening."

"It appears the dear child has obtained possession of a bottle
containing some drug, which he every now and then uses against those who
have displeased him. First, M. and Madame de Saint-Méran incurred his
displeasure, so he poured out three drops of his elixir--three drops
were sufficient; then followed Barrois, the old servant of M. Noirtier,
who sometimes rebuffed this little wretch--he therefore received the
same quantity of the elixir; the same happened to Valentine, of whom he
was jealous; he gave her the same dose as the others, and all was over
for her as well as the rest."

"Why, what nonsense are you telling us?" said Château-Renaud.

"Yes, it is an extraordinary story," said Beauchamp; "is it not?"

"It is absurd," said Debray.

"Ah," said Beauchamp, "you doubt me? Well, you can ask my servant, or
rather him who will no longer be my servant tomorrow, it was the talk of
the house."

"And this elixir, where is it? what is it?"

"The child conceals it."

"But where did he find it?"

"In his mother's laboratory."

"Does his mother then, keep poisons in her laboratory?"

"How can I tell? You are questioning me like a king's attorney. I only
repeat what I have been told, and like my informant I can do no more.
The poor devil would eat nothing, from fear."

"It is incredible!"

"No, my dear fellow, it is not at all incredible. You saw the child pass
through the Rue Richelieu last year, who amused himself with killing his
brothers and sisters by sticking pins in their ears while they slept.
The generation who follow us are very precocious."

"Come, Beauchamp," said Château-Renaud, "I will bet anything you do not
believe a word of all you have been telling us."

"I do not see the Count of Monte Cristo here."

"He is worn out," said Debray; "besides, he could not well appear in
public, since he has been the dupe of the Cavalcanti, who, it appears,
presented themselves to him with false letters of credit, and cheated
him out of 100,000 francs upon the hypothesis of this principality."

"By the way, M. de Château-Renaud," asked Beauchamp, "how is Morrel?"

"_Ma foi_, I have called three times without once seeing him. Still, his
sister did not seem uneasy, and told me that though she had not seen him
for two or three days, she was sure he was well."

"Ah, now I think of it, the Count of Monte Cristo cannot appear in the
hall," said Beauchamp.

"Why not?"

"Because he is an actor in the drama."

"Has he assassinated anyone, then?"

"No, on the contrary, they wished to assassinate him. You know that it
was in leaving his house that M. de Caderousse was murdered by his
friend Benedetto. You know that the famous waistcoat was found in his
house, containing the letter which stopped the signature of the
marriage-contract. Do you see the waistcoat? There it is, all blood-
stained, on the desk, as a testimony of the crime."

"Ah, very good."

"Hush, gentlemen, here is the court; let us go back to our places." A
noise was heard in the hall; the sergeant called his two patrons with an
energetic "hem!" and the door-keeper appearing, called out with that
shrill voice peculiar to his order, ever since the days of Beaumarchais,
"The court, gentlemen!"



Chapter 110. The Indictment

The judges took their places in the midst of the most profound silence;
the jury took their seats; M. de Villefort, the object of unusual
attention, and we had almost said of general admiration, sat in the
armchair and cast a tranquil glance around him. Everyone looked with
astonishment on that grave and severe face, whose calm expression
personal griefs had been unable to disturb, and the aspect of a man who
was a stranger to all human emotions excited something very like terror.

"Gendarmes," said the president, "lead in the accused."

At these words the public attention became more intense, and all eyes
were turned towards the door through which Benedetto was to enter. The
door soon opened and the accused appeared. The same impression was
experienced by all present, and no one was deceived by the expression of
his countenance. His features bore no sign of that deep emotion which
stops the beating of the heart and blanches the cheek. His hands,
gracefully placed, one upon his hat, the other in the opening of his
white waistcoat, were not at all tremulous; his eye was calm and even
brilliant. Scarcely had he entered the hall when he glanced at the whole
body of magistrates and assistants; his eye rested longer on the
president, and still more so on the king's attorney.

By the side of Andrea was stationed the lawyer who was to conduct his
defence, and who had been appointed by the court, for Andrea disdained
to pay any attention to those details, to which he appeared to attach no
importance. The lawyer was a young man with light hair whose face
expressed a hundred times more emotion than that which characterized the
prisoner.


The president called for the indictment, revised as we know, by the
clever and implacable pen of Villefort. During the reading of this,
which was long, the public attention was continually drawn towards
Andrea, who bore the inspection with Spartan unconcern. Villefort had
never been so concise and eloquent. The crime was depicted in the most
vivid colors; the former life of the prisoner, his transformation, a
review of his life from the earliest period, were set forth with all the
talent that a knowledge of human life could furnish to a mind like that
of the procureur. Benedetto was thus forever condemned in public opinion
before the sentence of the law could be pronounced.

Andrea paid no attention to the successive charges which were brought
against him. M. de Villefort, who examined him attentively, and who no
doubt practiced upon him all the psychological studies he was accustomed
to use, in vain endeavored to make him lower his eyes, notwithstanding
the depth and profundity of his gaze. At length the reading of the
indictment was ended.

"Accused," said the president, "your name and surname?"

Andrea arose.

"Excuse me, Mr. President," he said, in a clear voice, "but I see you
are going to adopt a course of questions through which I cannot follow
you. I have an idea, which I will explain by and by, of making an
exception to the usual form of accusation. Allow me, then, if you
please, to answer in different order, or I will not do so at all." The
astonished president looked at the jury, who in turn looked at
Villefort. The whole assembly manifested great surprise, but Andrea
appeared quite unmoved. "Your age?" said the president; "will you answer
that question?"

"I will answer that question, as well as the rest, Mr. President, but in
its turn."

"Your age?" repeated the president.

"I am twenty-one years old, or rather I shall be in a few days, as I was
born the night of the 27th of September, 1817." M. de Villefort, who was
busy taking down some notes, raised his head at the mention of this
date. "Where were you born?" continued the president.

"At Auteuil, near Paris." M. de Villefort a second time raised his head,
looked at Benedetto as if he had been gazing at the head of Medusa, and
became livid. As for Benedetto, he gracefully wiped his lips with a fine
cambric pocket-handkerchief.

"Your profession?"

"First I was a forger," answered Andrea, as calmly as possible; "then I
became a thief, and lately have become an assassin." A murmur, or rather
storm, of indignation burst from all parts of the assembly. The judges
themselves appeared to be stupefied, and the jury manifested tokens of
disgust for a cynicism so unexpected in a man of fashion. M. de
Villefort pressed his hand upon his brow, which, at first pale, had
become red and burning; then he suddenly arose and looked around as
though he had lost his senses--he wanted air.


"Are you looking for anything, Mr. Procureur?" asked Benedetto, with his
most ingratiating smile. M. de Villefort answered nothing, but sat, or
rather threw himself down again upon his chair.

"And now, prisoner, will you consent to tell your name?" said the
president. "The brutal affectation with which you have enumerated and
