Chapter 89. The Night

Monte Cristo waited, according to his usual custom, until Duprez had
sung his famous "_Suivez-moi!_" then he rose and went out. Morrel took
leave of him at the door, renewing his promise to be with him the next
morning at seven o'clock, and to bring Emmanuel. Then he stepped into
his _coupé_, calm and smiling, and was at home in five minutes. No one
who knew the count could mistake his expression when, on entering, he
said, "Ali, bring me my pistols with the ivory cross."

Ali brought the box to his master, who examined the weapons with a
solicitude very natural to a man who is about to intrust his life to a
little powder and shot. These were pistols of an especial pattern, which
Monte Cristo had had made for target practice in his own room. A cap was
sufficient to drive out the bullet, and from the adjoining room no one
would have suspected that the count was, as sportsmen would say, keeping
his hand in. He was just taking one up and looking for the point to aim
at on a little iron plate which served him as a target, when his study
door opened, and Baptistin entered. Before he had spoken a word, the
count saw in the next room a veiled woman, who had followed closely
after Baptistin, and now, seeing the count with a pistol in his hand and
swords on the table, rushed in. Baptistin looked at his master, who made
a sign to him, and he went out, closing the door after him. "Who are
you, madame?" said the count to the veiled woman.


The stranger cast one look around her, to be certain that they were
quite alone; then bending as if she would have knelt, and joining her
hands, she said with an accent of despair, "Edmond, you will not kill my
son?" The count retreated a step, uttered a slight exclamation, and let
fall the pistol he held. "What name did you pronounce then, Madame de
Morcerf?" said he. "Yours!" cried she, throwing back her veil,--"yours,
which I alone, perhaps, have not forgotten. Edmond, it is not Madame de
Morcerf who is come to you, it is Mercédès."

"Mercédès is dead, madame," said Monte Cristo; "I know no one now of
that name."

"Mercédès lives, sir, and she remembers, for she alone recognized you
when she saw you, and even before she saw you, by your voice, Edmond,--
by the simple sound of your voice; and from that moment she has followed
your steps, watched you, feared you, and she needs not to inquire what
hand has dealt the blow which now strikes M. de Morcerf."

"Fernand, do you mean?" replied Monte Cristo, with bitter irony; "since
we are recalling names, let us remember them all." Monte Cristo had
pronounced the name of Fernand with such an expression of hatred that
Mercédès felt a thrill of horror run through every vein. "You see,
Edmond, I am not mistaken, and have cause to say, 'Spare my son!'"

"And who told you, madame, that I have any hostile intentions against
your son?"

"No one, in truth; but a mother has twofold sight. I guessed all; I
followed him this evening to the Opera, and, concealed in a parquet box,
have seen all."

"If you have seen all, madame, you know that the son of Fernand has
publicly insulted me," said Monte Cristo with awful calmness.

"Oh, for pity's sake!"

"You have seen that he would have thrown his glove in my face if Morrel,
one of my friends, had not stopped him."

"Listen to me, my son has also guessed who you are,--he attributes his
father's misfortunes to you."

"Madame, you are mistaken, they are not misfortunes,--it is a
punishment. It is not I who strike M. de Morcerf; it is Providence which
punishes him."

"And why do you represent Providence?" cried Mercédès. "Why do you
remember when it forgets? What are Yanina and its vizier to you, Edmond?
What injury has Fernand Mondego done you in betraying Ali Tepelini?"

"Ah, madame," replied Monte Cristo, "all this is an affair between the
French captain and the daughter of Vasiliki. It does not concern me, you
are right; and if I have sworn to revenge myself, it is not on the
French captain, or the Count of Morcerf, but on the fisherman Fernand,
the husband of Mercédès the Catalane."

"Ah, sir!" cried the countess, "how terrible a vengeance for a fault
which fatality made me commit!--for I am the only culprit, Edmond, and
if you owe revenge to anyone, it is to me, who had not fortitude to bear
your absence and my solitude."


"But," exclaimed Monte Cristo, "why was I absent? And why were you
alone?"

"Because you had been arrested, Edmond, and were a prisoner."

"And why was I arrested? Why was I a prisoner?"

"I do not know," said Mercédès.

"You do not, madame; at least, I hope not. But I will tell you. I was
arrested and became a prisoner because, under the arbor of La Réserve,
the day before I was to marry you, a man named Danglars wrote this
letter, which the fisherman Fernand himself posted."

Monte Cristo went to a secretary desk, opened a drawer by a spring, from
which he took a paper which had lost its original color, and the ink of
which had become of a rusty hue--this he placed in the hands of
Mercédès. It was Danglars' letter to the king's attorney, which the
Count of Monte Cristo, disguised as a clerk from the house of Thomson &
French, had taken from the file against Edmond Dantès, on the day he had
paid the two hundred thousand francs to M. de Boville. Mercédès read
with terror the following lines:--

"The king's attorney is informed by a friend to the throne and religion
that one Edmond Dantès, second in command on board the _Pharaon_, this
day arrived from Smyrna, after having touched at Naples and Porto-
Ferrajo, is the bearer of a letter from Murat to the usurper, and of
another letter from the usurper to the Bonapartist club in Paris. Ample
corroboration of this statement may be obtained by arresting the above-
mentioned Edmond Dantès, who either carries the letter for Paris about
with him, or has it at his father's abode. Should it not be found in
possession of either father or son, then it will assuredly be discovered
in the cabin belonging to the said Dantès on board the _Pharaon_."

"How dreadful!" said Mercédès, passing her hand across her brow, moist
with perspiration; "and that letter----"

"I bought it for two hundred thousand francs, madame," said Monte
Cristo; "but that is a trifle, since it enables me to justify myself to
you."

"And the result of that letter----"

"You well know, madame, was my arrest; but you do not know how long that
arrest lasted. You do not know that I remained for fourteen years within
a quarter of a league of you, in a dungeon in the Château d'If. You do
not know that every day of those fourteen years I renewed the vow of
vengeance which I had made the first day; and yet I was not aware that
you had married Fernand, my calumniator, and that my father had died of
hunger!"

"Can it be?" cried Mercédès, shuddering.

"That is what I heard on leaving my prison fourteen years after I had
entered it; and that is why, on account of the living Mercédès and my
deceased father, I have sworn to revenge myself on Fernand, and--I have
revenged myself."

"And you are sure the unhappy Fernand did that?"

"I am satisfied, madame, that he did what I have told you; besides, that
is not much more odious than that a Frenchman by adoption should pass
over to the English; that a Spaniard by birth should have fought against
the Spaniards; that a stipendiary of Ali should have betrayed and
murdered Ali. Compared with such things, what is the letter you have
just read?--a lover's deception, which the woman who has married that
man ought certainly to forgive; but not so the lover who was to have
married her. Well, the French did not avenge themselves on the traitor,
the Spaniards did not shoot the traitor, Ali in his tomb left the
traitor unpunished; but I, betrayed, sacrificed, buried, have risen from
my tomb, by the grace of God, to punish that man. He sends me for that
purpose, and here I am." The poor woman's head and arms fell; her legs
bent under her, and she fell on her knees. "Forgive, Edmond, forgive for
my sake, who love you still!"

The dignity of the wife checked the fervor of the lover and the mother.
Her forehead almost touched the carpet, when the count sprang forward
and raised her. Then seated on a chair, she looked at the manly
countenance of Monte Cristo, on which grief and hatred still impressed a
threatening expression. "Not crush that accursed race?" murmured he;
"abandon my purpose at the moment of its accomplishment? Impossible,
madame, impossible!"

"Edmond," said the poor mother, who tried every means, "when I call you
Edmond, why do you not call me Mercédès?"

"Mercédès!" repeated Monte Cristo; "Mercédès! Well yes, you are right;
that name has still its charms, and this is the first time for a long
period that I have pronounced it so distinctly. Oh, Mercédès, I have
uttered your name with the sigh of melancholy, with the groan of sorrow,
with the last effort of despair; I have uttered it when frozen with
cold, crouched on the straw in my dungeon; I have uttered it, consumed
with heat, rolling on the stone floor of my prison. Mercédès, I must
revenge myself, for I suffered fourteen years,--fourteen years I wept, I
cursed; now I tell you, Mercédès, I must revenge myself."

The count, fearing to yield to the entreaties of her he had so ardently
loved, called his sufferings to the assistance of his hatred. "Revenge
yourself, then, Edmond," cried the poor mother; "but let your vengeance
fall on the culprits,--on him, on me, but not on my son!"

"It is written in the good book," said Monte Cristo, "that the sins of
the fathers shall fall upon their children to the third and fourth
generation. Since God himself dictated those words to his prophet, why
should I seek to make myself better than God?"

"Edmond," continued Mercédès, with her arms extended towards the count,
"since I first knew you, I have adored your name, have respected your
memory. Edmond, my friend, do not compel me to tarnish that noble and
pure image reflected incessantly on the mirror of my heart. Edmond, if
you knew all the prayers I have addressed to God for you while I thought
you were living and since I have thought you must be dead! Yes, dead,
