the heads of the multitude two objects were visible: the obelisk,
surmounted by a cross, which marks the centre of the square, and in
front of the obelisk, at the point where the three streets, del Babuino,
del Corso, and di Ripetta, meet, the two uprights of the scaffold,
between which glittered the curved knife of the _mandaïa_.

At the corner of the street they met the count's steward, who was
awaiting his master. The window, let at an exorbitant price, which the
count had doubtless wished to conceal from his guests, was on the second
floor of the great palace, situated between the Via del Babuino and the
Monte Pincio. It consisted, as we have said, of a small dressing-room,
opening into a bedroom, and, when the door of communication was shut,
the inmates were quite alone. On chairs were laid elegant masquerade
costumes of blue and white satin. "As you left the choice of your
costumes to me," said the count to the two friends, "I have had these
brought, as they will be the most worn this year; and they are most
suitable, on account of the _confetti_ (sweetmeats), as they do not show
the flour."


Franz heard the words of the count but imperfectly, and he perhaps did
not fully appreciate this new attention to their wishes; for he was
wholly absorbed by the spectacle that the Piazza del Popolo presented,
and by the terrible instrument that was in the centre. It was the first
time Franz had ever seen a guillotine,--we say guillotine, because the
Roman _mandaïa_ is formed on almost the same model as the French
instrument. [*] The knife, which is shaped like a crescent, that cuts
with the convex side, falls from a less height, and that is all the
difference. Two men, seated on the movable plank on which the victim is
laid, were eating their breakfasts, while waiting for the criminal.
Their repast consisted apparently of bread and sausages. One of them
lifted the plank, took out a flask of wine, drank some, and then passed
it to his companion. These two men were the executioner's assistants. At
this sight Franz felt the perspiration start forth upon his brow. The
prisoners, transported the previous evening from the Carcere Nuovo to
the little church of Santa Maria del Popolo, had passed the night, each
accompanied by two priests, in a chapel closed by a grating, before
which were two sentinels, who were relieved at intervals. A double line
of carbineers, placed on each side of the door of the church, reached to
the scaffold, and formed a circle around it, leaving a path about ten
feet wide, and around the guillotine a space of nearly a hundred feet.
All the rest of the square was paved with heads. Many women held their
infants on their shoulders, and thus the children had the best view. The
Monte Pincio seemed a vast amphitheatre filled with spectators; the
balconies of the two churches at the corner of the Via del Babuino and
the Via di Ripetta were crammed; the steps even seemed a parti-colored
sea, that was impelled towards the portico; every niche in the wall held
its living statue. What the count said was true--the most curious
spectacle in life is that of death. And yet, instead of the silence and
the solemnity demanded by the occasion, laughter and jests arose from
the crowd. It was evident that the execution was, in the eyes of the
people, only the commencement of the Carnival. Suddenly the tumult
ceased, as if by magic, and the doors of the church opened. A
brotherhood of penitents, clothed from head to foot in robes of gray
sackcloth, with holes for the eyes, and holding in their hands lighted
tapers, appeared first; the chief marched at the head.


Behind the penitents came a man of vast stature and proportions. He was
naked, with the exception of cloth drawers at the left side of which
hung a large knife in a sheath, and he bore on his right shoulder a
heavy iron sledge-hammer. This man was the executioner. He had,
moreover, sandals bound on his feet by cords. Behind the executioner
came, in the order in which they were to die, first Peppino and then
Andrea. Each was accompanied by two priests. Neither had his eyes
bandaged. Peppino walked with a firm step, doubtless aware of what
awaited him. Andrea was supported by two priests. Each of them, from
time to time, kissed the crucifix a confessor held out to them. At this
sight alone Franz felt his legs tremble under him. He looked at Albert--
he was as white as his shirt, and mechanically cast away his cigar,
although he had not half smoked it. The count alone seemed unmoved--nay,
more, a slight color seemed striving to rise in his pale cheeks. His
nostrils dilated like those of a wild beast that scents its prey, and
his lips, half opened, disclosed his white teeth, small and sharp like
those of a jackal. And yet his features wore an expression of smiling
tenderness, such as Franz had never before witnessed in them; his black
eyes especially were full of kindness and pity. However, the two
culprits advanced, and as they approached their faces became visible.
Peppino was a handsome young man of four or five and twenty, bronzed by
the sun; he carried his head erect, and seemed on the watch to see on
which side his liberator would appear. Andrea was short and fat; his
visage, marked with brutal cruelty, did not indicate age; he might be
thirty. In prison he had suffered his beard to grow; his head fell on
his shoulder, his legs bent beneath him, and his movements were
apparently automatic and unconscious.


* Dr. Guillotin got the idea of his famous machine from witnessing an
execution in Italy.

"I thought," said Franz to the count, "that you told me there would be
but one execution."

"I told you true," replied he coldly.

"And yet here are two culprits."

"Yes; but only one of these two is about to die; the other has many
years to live."

"If the pardon is to come, there is no time to lose."

"And see, here it is," said the count. At the moment when Peppino
reached the foot of the _mandaïa_, a priest arrived in some haste,
forced his way through the soldiers, and, advancing to the chief of the
brotherhood, gave him a folded paper. The piercing eye of Peppino had
noticed all. The chief took the paper, unfolded it, and, raising his
hand, "Heaven be praised, and his holiness also," said he in a loud
voice; "here is a pardon for one of the prisoners!"

"A pardon!" cried the people with one voice--"a pardon!" At this cry
Andrea raised his head. "Pardon for whom?" cried he.

Peppino remained breathless. "A pardon for Peppino, called Rocca
Priori," said the principal friar. And he passed the paper to the
officer commanding the carbineers, who read and returned it to him.

"For Peppino!" cried Andrea, who seemed roused from the torpor in which
he had been plunged. "Why for him and not for me? We ought to die
together. I was promised he should die with me. You have no right to put
me to death alone. I will not die alone--I will not!" And he broke from
the priests struggling and raving like a wild beast, and striving
desperately to break the cords that bound his hands. The executioner
made a sign, and his two assistants leaped from the scaffold and seized
him. "What is going on?" asked Franz of the count; for, as all the talk
was in the Roman dialect, he had not perfectly understood it. "Do you
not see?" returned the count, "that this human creature who is about to
die is furious that his fellow-sufferer does not perish with him? and,
were he able, he would rather tear him to pieces with his teeth and
nails than let him enjoy the life he himself is about to be deprived of.
Oh, man, man--race of crocodiles," cried the count, extending his
clenched hands towards the crowd, "how well do I recognize you there,
and that at all times you are worthy of yourselves!" Meanwhile Andrea
and the two executioners were struggling on the ground, and he kept
exclaiming, "He ought to die!--he shall die!--I will not die alone!"

"Look, look," cried the count, seizing the young men's hands--"look, for
on my soul it is curious. Here is a man who had resigned himself to his
fate, who was going to the scaffold to die--like a coward, it is true,
but he was about to die without resistance. Do you know what gave him
strength?--do you know what consoled him? It was, that another partook
of his punishment--that another partook of his anguish--that another was
to die before him. Lead two sheep to the butcher's, two oxen to the
slaughterhouse, and make one of them understand that his companion will
not die; the sheep will bleat for pleasure, the ox will bellow with joy.
But man--man, whom God created in his own image--man, upon whom God has
laid his first, his sole commandment, to love his neighbor--man, to whom
God has given a voice to express his thoughts--what is his first cry
when he hears his fellow-man is saved? A blasphemy. Honor to man, this
masterpiece of nature, this king of the creation!" And the count burst
into a laugh; a terrible laugh, that showed he must have suffered
horribly to be able thus to laugh.

However, the struggle still continued, and it was dreadful to witness.
The two assistants carried Andrea up to the scaffold; the people all
took part against Andrea, and twenty thousand voices cried, "Put him to
death! put him to death!" Franz sprang back, but the count seized his
arm, and held him before the window. "What are you doing?" said he. "Do
you pity him? If you heard the cry of 'Mad dog!' you would take your
gun--you would unhesitatingly shoot the poor beast, who, after all, was
only guilty of having been bitten by another dog. And yet you pity a man
who, without being bitten by one of his race, has yet murdered his
benefactor; and who, now unable to kill anyone, because his hands are
bound, wishes to see his companion in captivity perish. No, no--look,
look!"


The recommendation was needless. Franz was fascinated by the horrible
spectacle. The two assistants had borne Andrea to the scaffold, and
there, in spite of his struggles, his bites, and his cries, had forced
him to his knees. During this time the executioner had raised his mace,
and signed to them to get out of the way; the criminal strove to rise,
but, ere he had time, the mace fell on his left temple. A dull and heavy
sound was heard, and the man dropped like an ox on his face, and then
turned over on his back. The executioner let fall his mace, drew his
knife, and with one stroke opened his throat, and mounting on his
stomach, stamped violently on it with his feet. At every stroke a jet of
blood sprang from the wound.

This time Franz could contain himself no longer, but sank, half
fainting, into a seat. Albert, with his eyes closed, was standing
grasping the window-curtains. The count was erect and triumphant, like
the Avenging Angel!



Chapter 36. The Carnival at Rome

When Franz recovered his senses, he saw Albert drinking a glass of
water, of which, to judge from his pallor, he stood in great need; and
the count, who was assuming his masquerade costume. He glanced
mechanically towards the square--the scene was wholly changed; scaffold,
executioners, victims, all had disappeared; only the people remained,
full of noise and excitement. The bell of Monte Citorio, which only
sounds on the pope's decease and the opening of the Carnival, was
ringing a joyous peal. "Well," asked he of the count, "what has, then,
happened?"

"Nothing," replied the count; "only, as you see, the Carnival has
commenced. Make haste and dress yourself."
