Debray continued:--

"When you receive this, you will no longer have a husband. Oh, you need
not be alarmed, you will only have lost him as you have lost your
daughter; I mean that I shall be travelling on one of the thirty or
forty roads leading out of France. I owe you some explanations for my
conduct, and as you are a woman that can perfectly understand me, I will
give them. Listen, then. I received this morning five millions which I
paid away; almost directly afterwards another demand for the same sum
was presented to me; I put this creditor off till tomorrow and I intend
leaving today, to escape that tomorrow, which would be rather too
unpleasant for me to endure. You understand this, do you not, my most
precious wife? I say you understand this, because you are as conversant
with my affairs as I am; indeed, I think you understand them better,
since I am ignorant of what has become of a considerable portion of my
fortune, once very tolerable, while I am sure, madame, that you know
perfectly well. For women have infallible instincts; they can even
explain the marvellous by an algebraic calculation they have invented;
but I, who only understand my own figures, know nothing more than that
one day these figures deceived me. Have you admired the rapidity of my
fall? Have you been slightly dazzled at the sudden fusion of my ingots?
I confess I have seen nothing but the fire; let us hope you have found
some gold among the ashes. With this consoling idea, I leave you,
madame, and most prudent wife, without any conscientious reproach for
abandoning you; you have friends left, and the ashes I have already
mentioned, and above all the liberty I hasten to restore to you. And
here, madame, I must add another word of explanation. So long as I hoped
you were working for the good of our house and for the fortune of our
daughter, I philosophically closed my eyes; but as you have transformed
that house into a vast ruin I will not be the foundation of another
man's fortune. You were rich when I married you, but little respected.
Excuse me for speaking so very candidly, but as this is intended only
for ourselves, I do not see why I should weigh my words. I have
augmented our fortune, and it has continued to increase during the last
fifteen years, till extraordinary and unexpected catastrophes have
suddenly overturned it,--without any fault of mine, I can honestly
declare. You, madame, have only sought to increase your own, and I am
convinced that you have succeeded. I leave you, therefore, as I took
you,--rich, but little respected. Adieu! I also intend from this time to
work on my own account. Accept my acknowledgments for the example you
have set me, and which I intend following.

"Your very devoted husband,

"Baron Danglars."

The baroness had watched Debray while he read this long and painful
letter, and saw him, notwithstanding his self-control, change color once
or twice. When he had ended the perusal, he folded the letter and
resumed his pensive attitude. "Well?" asked Madame Danglars, with an
anxiety easy to be understood.

"Well, madame?" unhesitatingly repeated Debray.

"With what ideas does that letter inspire you?"

"Oh, it is simple enough, madame; it inspires me with the idea that M.
Danglars has left suspiciously."

"Certainly; but is this all you have to say to me?"

"I do not understand you," said Debray with freezing coldness.

"He is gone! Gone, never to return!"

"Oh, madame, do not think that!"

"I tell you he will never return. I know his character; he is inflexible
in any resolutions formed for his own interests. If he could have made
any use of me, he would have taken me with him; he leaves me in Paris,
as our separation will conduce to his benefit;--therefore he has gone,
and I am free forever," added Madame Danglars, in the same supplicating
tone. Debray, instead of answering, allowed her to remain in an attitude
of nervous inquiry. "Well?" she said at length, "do you not answer me?"

"I have but one question to ask you,--what do you intend to do?"

"I was going to ask you," replied the baroness with a beating heart.

"Ah, then, you wish to ask advice of me?"

"Yes; I do wish to ask your advice," said Madame Danglars with anxious
expectation.

"Then if you wish to take my advice," said the young man coldly, "I
would recommend you to travel."

"To travel!" she murmured.

"Certainly; as M. Danglars says, you are rich, and perfectly free. In my
opinion, a withdrawal from Paris is absolutely necessary after the
double catastrophe of Mademoiselle Danglars' broken contract and M.
Danglars' disappearance. The world will think you abandoned and poor,
for the wife of a bankrupt would never be forgiven, were she to keep up
an appearance of opulence. You have only to remain in Paris for about a
fortnight, telling the world you are abandoned, and relating the details
of this desertion to your best friends, who will soon spread the report.
Then you can quit your house, leaving your jewels and giving up your
jointure, and everyone's mouth will be filled with praises of your
disinterestedness. They will know you are deserted, and think you also
poor, for I alone know your real financial position, and am quite ready
to give up my accounts as an honest partner." The dread with which the
pale and motionless baroness listened to this, was equalled by the calm
indifference with which Debray had spoken. "Deserted?" she repeated;
"ah, yes, I am, indeed, deserted! You are right, sir, and no one can
doubt my position." These were the only words that this proud and
violently enamoured woman could utter in response to Debray.


"But then you are rich,--very rich, indeed," continued Debray, taking
out some papers from his pocket-book, which he spread upon the table.
Madame Danglars did not see them; she was engaged in stilling the
beatings of her heart, and restraining the tears which were ready to
gush forth. At length a sense of dignity prevailed, and if she did not
entirely master her agitation, she at least succeeded in preventing the
fall of a single tear. "Madame," said Debray, "it is nearly six months
since we have been associated. You furnished a principal of 100,000
francs. Our partnership began in the month of April. In May we commenced
operations, and in the course of the month gained 450,000 francs. In
June the profit amounted to 900,000. In July we added 1,700,000 francs,-
-it was, you know, the month of the Spanish bonds. In August we lost
300,000 francs at the beginning of the month, but on the 13th we made up
for it, and we now find that our accounts, reckoning from the first day
of partnership up to yesterday, when I closed them, showed a capital of
2,400,000 francs, that is, 1,200,000 for each of us. Now, madame," said
Debray, delivering up his accounts in the methodical manner of a
stockbroker, "there are still 80,000 francs, the interest of this money,
in my hands."

"But," said the baroness, "I thought you never put the money out to
interest."

"Excuse me, madame," said Debray coldly, "I had your permission to do
so, and I have made use of it. There are, then, 40,000 francs for your
share, besides the 100,000 you furnished me to begin with, making in all
1,340,000 francs for your portion. Now, madame, I took the precaution of
drawing out your money the day before yesterday; it is not long ago, you
see, and I was in continual expectation of being called on to deliver up
my accounts. There is your money,--half in bank-notes, the other half in
checks payable to bearer. I say _there_, for as I did not consider my
house safe enough, or lawyers sufficiently discreet, and as landed
property carries evidence with it, and moreover since you have no right
to possess anything independent of your husband, I have kept this sum,
now your whole fortune, in a chest concealed under that closet, and for
greater security I myself concealed it there.

"Now, madame," continued Debray, first opening the closet, then the
chest;--"now, madame, here are 800 notes of 1,000 francs each,
resembling, as you see, a large book bound in iron; to this I add a
certificate in the funds of 25,000 francs; then, for the odd cash,
making I think about 110,000 francs, here is a check upon my banker,
who, not being M. Danglars, will pay you the amount, you may rest
assured." Madame Danglars mechanically took the check, the bond, and the
heap of bank-notes. This enormous fortune made no great appearance on
the table. Madame Danglars, with tearless eyes, but with her breast
heaving with concealed emotion, placed the bank-notes in her bag, put
the certificate and check into her pocket-book, and then, standing pale
and mute, awaited one kind word of consolation. But she waited in vain.

"Now, madame," said Debray, "you have a splendid fortune, an income of
about 60,000 livres a year, which is enormous for a woman who cannot
keep an establishment here for a year, at least. You will be able to
indulge all your fancies; besides, should you find your income
insufficient, you can, for the sake of the past, madame, make use of
mine; and I am ready to offer you all I possess, on loan."

"Thank you, sir--thank you," replied the baroness; "you forget that what
you have just paid me is much more than a poor woman requires, who
intends for some time, at least, to retire from the world."

Debray was, for a moment, surprised, but immediately recovering himself,
he bowed with an air which seemed to say, "As you please, madame."

Madame Danglars had until then, perhaps, hoped for something; but when
she saw the careless bow of Debray, and the glance by which it was
accompanied, together with his significant silence, she raised her head,
and without passion or violence or even hesitation, ran downstairs,
disdaining to address a last farewell to one who could thus part from
her. "Bah," said Debray, when she had left, "these are fine projects!
She will remain at home, read novels, and speculate at cards, since she
can no longer do so on the Bourse." Then taking up his account book, he
cancelled with the greatest care all the entries of the amounts he had
just paid away. "I have 1,060,000 francs remaining," he said. "What a
pity Mademoiselle de Villefort is dead! She suited me in every respect,
and I would have married her." And he calmly waited until the twenty
minutes had elapsed after Madame Danglars' departure before he left the
house. During this time he occupied himself in making figures, with his
watch by his side.

Asmodeus--that diabolical personage, who would have been created by
every fertile imagination if Le Sage had not acquired the priority in
his great masterpiece--would have enjoyed a singular spectacle, if he
had lifted up the roof of the little house in the Rue Saint-Germain-des-
Prés, while Debray was casting up his figures. Above the room in which
Debray had been dividing two millions and a half with Madame Danglars
was another, inhabited by persons who have played too prominent a part
in the incidents we have related for their appearance not to create some
interest. Mercédès and Albert were in that room. Mercédès was much
changed within the last few days; not that even in her days of fortune
she had ever dressed with the magnificent display which makes us no
