noticed walked upstairs, preceded by the commissary of police, and
supported by the second gendarme who guarded the staircase and was
himself re-enforced by the one stationed at the door.

Andrea was indebted for this visit to the following circumstances. At
daybreak, the telegraphs were set at work in all directions, and almost
immediately the authorities in every district had exerted their utmost
endeavors to arrest the murderer of Caderousse. Compiègne, that royal
residence and fortified town, is well furnished with authorities,
gendarmes, and commissaries of police; they therefore began operations
as soon as the telegraphic despatch arrived, and the Bell and Bottle
being the best-known hotel in the town, they had naturally directed
their first inquiries there.


Now, besides the reports of the sentinels guarding the Hôtel de Ville,
which is next door to the Bell and Bottle, it had been stated by others
that a number of travellers had arrived during the night. The sentinel
who was relieved at six o'clock in the morning, remembered perfectly
that just as he was taking his post a few minutes past four a young man
arrived on horseback, with a little boy before him. The young man,
having dismissed the boy and horse, knocked at the door of the hotel,
which was opened, and again closed after his entrance. This late arrival
had attracted much suspicion, and the young man being no other than
Andrea, the commissary and gendarme, who was a brigadier, directed their
steps towards his room.

They found the door ajar. "Oh, ho," said the brigadier, who thoroughly
understood the trick; "a bad sign to find the door open! I would rather
find it triply bolted." And, indeed, the little note and pin upon the
table confirmed, or rather corroborated, the sad truth. Andrea had fled.
We say corroborated, because the brigadier was too experienced to be
convinced by a single proof. He glanced around, looked in the bed, shook
the curtains, opened the closets, and finally stopped at the chimney.
Andrea had taken the precaution to leave no traces of his feet in the
ashes, but still it was an outlet, and in this light was not to be
passed over without serious investigation.

The brigadier sent for some sticks and straw, and having filled the
chimney with them, set a light to it. The fire crackled, and the smoke
ascended like the dull vapor from a volcano; but still no prisoner fell
down, as they expected. The fact was, that Andrea, at war with society
ever since his youth, was quite as deep as a gendarme, even though he
were advanced to the rank of brigadier, and quite prepared for the fire,
he had climbed out on the roof and was crouching down against the
chimney-pots. At one time he thought he was saved, for he heard the
brigadier exclaim in a loud voice, to the two gendarmes, "He is not
here!" But venturing to peep, he perceived that the latter, instead of
retiring, as might have been reasonably expected upon this announcement,
were watching with increased attention.

It was now his turn to look about him; the Hôtel de Ville, a massive
sixteenth century building, was on his right; anyone could descend from
the openings in the tower, and examine every corner of the roof below,
and Andrea expected momentarily to see the head of a gendarme appear at
one of these openings. If once discovered, he knew he would be lost, for
the roof afforded no chance of escape; he therefore resolved to descend,
not through the same chimney by which he had come up, but by a similar
one conducting to another room. He looked around for a chimney from
which no smoke issued, and having reached it, he disappeared through the
orifice without being seen by anyone. At the same minute, one of the
little windows of the Hôtel de Ville was thrown open, and the head of a
gendarme appeared. For an instant it remained motionless as one of the
stone decorations of the building, then after a long sigh of
disappointment the head disappeared. The brigadier, calm and dignified
as the law he represented, passed through the crowd, without answering
the thousand questions addressed to him, and re-entered the hotel.

"Well?" asked the two gendarmes.

"Well, my boys," said the brigadier, "the brigand must really have
escaped early this morning; but we will send to the Villers-Coterets and
Noyon roads, and search the forest, when we shall catch him, no doubt."
The honorable functionary had scarcely expressed himself thus, in that
intonation which is peculiar to brigadiers of the gendarmerie, when a
loud scream, accompanied by the violent ringing of a bell, resounded
through the court of the hotel. "Ah, what is that?" cried the brigadier.

"Some traveller seems impatient," said the host. "What number was it
that rang?"

"Number 3."

"Run, waiter!" At this moment the screams and ringing were redoubled.
"Ah," said the brigadier, stopping the servant, "the person who is
ringing appears to want something more than a waiter; we will attend
upon him with a gendarme. Who occupies Number 3?"

"The little fellow who arrived last night in a post-chaise with his
sister, and who asked for an apartment with two beds." The bell here
rang for the third time, with another shriek of anguish.

"Follow me, Mr. Commissary!" said the brigadier; "tread in my steps."

"Wait an instant," said the host; "Number 3 has two staircases,--inside
and outside."

"Good," said the brigadier. "I will take charge of the inside one. Are
the carbines loaded?"

"Yes, brigadier."

"Well, you guard the exterior, and if he attempts to fly, fire upon him;
he must be a great criminal, from what the telegraph says."

The brigadier, followed by the commissary, disappeared by the inside
staircase, accompanied by the noise which his assertions respecting
Andrea had excited in the crowd.

This is what had happened. Andrea had very cleverly managed to descend
two-thirds of the chimney, but then his foot slipped, and
notwithstanding his endeavors, he came into the room with more speed and
noise than he intended. It would have signified little had the room been
empty, but unfortunately it was occupied. Two ladies, sleeping in one
bed, were awakened by the noise, and fixing their eyes upon the spot
whence the sound proceeded, they saw a man. One of these ladies, the
fair one, uttered those terrible shrieks which resounded through the
house, while the other, rushing to the bell-rope, rang with all her
strength. Andrea, as we can see, was surrounded by misfortune.

"For pity's sake," he cried, pale and bewildered, without seeing whom he
was addressing,--"for pity's sake do not call assistance! Save me!--I
will not harm you."

"Andrea, the murderer!" cried one of the ladies.

"Eugénie! Mademoiselle Danglars!" exclaimed Andrea, stupefied.

"Help, help!" cried Mademoiselle d'Armilly, taking the bell from her
companion's hand, and ringing it yet more violently. "Save me, I am
pursued!" said Andrea, clasping his hands. "For pity, for mercy's sake
do not deliver me up!"

"It is too late, they are coming," said Eugénie.

"Well, conceal me somewhere; you can say you were needlessly alarmed;
you can turn their suspicions and save my life!"


The two ladies, pressing closely to one another, and drawing the
bedclothes tightly around them, remained silent to this supplicating
voice, repugnance and fear taking possession of their minds.

"Well, be it so," at length said Eugénie; "return by the same road you
came, and we will say nothing about you, unhappy wretch."

"Here he is, here he is!" cried a voice from the landing; "here he is! I
see him!" The brigadier had put his eye to the keyhole, and had
discovered Andrea in a posture of entreaty. A violent blow from the butt
end of the musket burst open the lock, two more forced out the bolts,
and the broken door fell in. Andrea ran to the other door, leading to
the gallery, ready to rush out; but he was stopped short, and he stood
with his body a little thrown back, pale, and with the useless knife in
his clenched hand.

"Fly, then!" cried Mademoiselle d'Armilly, whose pity returned as her
fears diminished; "fly!"

"Or kill yourself!" said Eugénie (in a tone which a Vestal in the
amphitheatre would have used, when urging the victorious gladiator to
finish his vanquished adversary). Andrea shuddered, and looked on the
young girl with an expression which proved how little he understood such
ferocious honor. "Kill myself?" he cried, throwing down his knife; "why
should I do so?"

"Why, you said," answered Mademoiselle Danglars, "that you would be
condemned to die like the worst criminals."

"Bah," said Cavalcanti, crossing his arms, "one has friends."


The brigadier advanced to him, sword in hand. "Come, come," said Andrea,
"sheathe your sword, my fine fellow; there is no occasion to make such a
fuss, since I give myself up;" and he held out his hands to be manacled.
The girls looked with horror upon this shameful metamorphosis, the man
of the world shaking off his covering and appearing as a galley-slave.
Andrea turned towards them, and with an impertinent smile asked,--"Have
you any message for your father, Mademoiselle Danglars, for in all
probability I shall return to Paris?"

Eugénie covered her face with her hands. "Oh, ho!" said Andrea, "you
need not be ashamed, even though you did post after me. Was I not nearly
your husband?"


And with this raillery Andrea went out, leaving the two girls a prey to
their own feelings of shame, and to the comments of the crowd. An hour
after they stepped into their calash, both dressed in feminine attire.
The gate of the hotel had been closed to screen them from sight, but
they were forced, when the door was open, to pass through a throng of
curious glances and whispering voices. Eugénie closed her eyes; but
though she could not see, she could hear, and the sneers of the crowd
reached her in the carriage. "Oh, why is not the world a wilderness?"
she exclaimed, throwing herself into the arms of Mademoiselle d'Armilly,
her eyes sparkling with the same kind of rage which made Nero wish that
the Roman world had but one neck, that he might sever it at a single
blow. The next day they stopped at the Hôtel de Flandre, at Brussels.
The same evening Andrea was incarcerated in the Conciergerie.


