plot against you." Andrea looked steadily at Monte Cristo and
disappeared in the second drawing-room.


"Possibly," said Danglars; "was not this murdered man an old galley-
slave?"

"Yes," replied the count; "a felon named Caderousse." Danglars turned
slightly pale; Andrea reached the anteroom beyond the little drawing-
room.

"But go on signing," said Monte Cristo; "I perceive that my story has
caused a general emotion, and I beg to apologize to you, baroness, and
to Mademoiselle Danglars." The baroness, who had signed, returned the
pen to the notary. "Prince Cavalcanti," said the latter; "Prince
Cavalcanti, where are you?"

"Andrea, Andrea," repeated several young people, who were already on
sufficiently intimate terms with him to call him by his Christian name.

"Call the prince; inform him that it is his turn to sign," cried
Danglars to one of the floorkeepers.

But at the same instant the crowd of guests rushed in alarm into the
principal salon as if some frightful monster had entered the apartments,
_quærens quem devoret_. There was, indeed, reason to retreat, to be
alarmed, and to scream. An officer was placing two soldiers at the door
of each drawing-room, and was advancing towards Danglars, preceded by a
commissary of police, girded with his scarf. Madame Danglars uttered a
scream and fainted. Danglars, who thought himself threatened (certain
consciences are never calm),--Danglars even before his guests showed a
countenance of abject terror.

"What is the matter, sir?" asked Monte Cristo, advancing to meet the
commissioner.

"Which of you gentlemen," asked the magistrate, without replying to the
count, "answers to the name of Andrea Cavalcanti?" A cry of astonishment
was heard from all parts of the room. They searched; they questioned.
"But who then is Andrea Cavalcanti?" asked Danglars in amazement.

"A galley-slave, escaped from confinement at Toulon."

"And what crime has he committed?"

"He is accused," said the commissary with his inflexible voice, "of
having assassinated the man named Caderousse, his former companion in
prison, at the moment he was making his escape from the house of the
Count of Monte Cristo." Monte Cristo cast a rapid glance around him.
Andrea was gone.



Chapter 97. The Departure for Belgium

A few minutes after the scene of confusion produced in the salons of M.
Danglars by the unexpected appearance of the brigade of soldiers, and by
the disclosure which had followed, the mansion was deserted with as much
rapidity as if a case of plague or of cholera morbus had broken out
among the guests. In a few minutes, through all the doors, down all the
staircases, by every exit, everyone hastened to retire, or rather to
fly; for it was a situation where the ordinary condolences,--which even
the best friends are so eager to offer in great catastrophes,--were seen
to be utterly futile. There remained in the banker's house only
Danglars, closeted in his study, and making his statement to the officer
of gendarmes; Madame Danglars, terrified, in the boudoir with which we
are acquainted; and Eugénie, who with haughty air and disdainful lip had
retired to her room with her inseparable companion, Mademoiselle Louise
d'Armilly. As for the numerous servants (more numerous that evening than
usual, for their number was augmented by cooks and butlers from the Café
de Paris), venting on their employers their anger at what they termed
the insult to which they had been subjected, they collected in groups in
the hall, in the kitchens, or in their rooms, thinking very little of
their duty, which was thus naturally interrupted. Of all this household,
only two persons deserve our notice; these are Mademoiselle Eugénie
Danglars and Mademoiselle Louise d'Armilly.

The betrothed had retired, as we said, with haughty air, disdainful lip,
and the demeanor of an outraged queen, followed by her companion, who
was paler and more disturbed than herself. On reaching her room Eugénie
locked her door, while Louise fell on a chair.

"Ah, what a dreadful thing," said the young musician; "who would have
suspected it? M. Andrea Cavalcanti a murderer--a galley-slave escaped--a
convict!"

An ironical smile curled the lip of Eugénie. "In truth I was fated,"
said she. "I escaped the Morcerf only to fall into the Cavalcanti."

"Oh, do not confound the two, Eugénie."

"Hold your tongue! The men are all infamous, and I am happy to be able
now to do more than detest them--I despise them."

"What shall we do?" asked Louise.

"What shall we do?"

"Yes."

"Why, the same we had intended doing three days since--set off."

"What?--although you are not now going to be married, you intend still--
--"

"Listen, Louise. I hate this life of the fashionable world, always
ordered, measured, ruled, like our music-paper. What I have always
wished for, desired, and coveted, is the life of an artist, free and
independent, relying only on my own resources, and accountable only to
myself. Remain here? What for?--that they may try, a month hence, to
marry me again; and to whom?--M. Debray, perhaps, as it was once
proposed. No, Louise, no! This evening's adventure will serve for my
excuse. I did not seek one, I did not ask for one. God sends me this,
and I hail it joyfully!"

"How strong and courageous you are!" said the fair, frail girl to her
brunette companion.

"Did you not yet know me? Come, Louise, let us talk of our affairs. The
post-chaise----"

"Was happily bought three days since."

"Have you had it sent where we are to go for it?"

"Yes."

"Our passport?"

"Here it is."

And Eugénie, with her usual precision, opened a printed paper, and
read,--

"M. Léon d'Armilly, twenty years of age; profession, artist; hair black,
eyes black; travelling with his sister."

"Capital! How did you get this passport?"


"When I went to ask M. de Monte Cristo for letters to the directors of
the theatres at Rome and Naples, I expressed my fears of travelling as a
woman; he perfectly understood them, and undertook to procure for me a
man's passport, and two days after I received this, to which I have
added with my own hand, 'travelling with his sister.'"

"Well," said Eugénie cheerfully, "we have then only to pack up our
trunks; we shall start the evening of the signing of the contract,
instead of the evening of the wedding--that is all."

"But consider the matter seriously, Eugénie!"

"Oh, I am done with considering! I am tired of hearing only of market
reports, of the end of the month, of the rise and fall of Spanish funds,
of Haitian bonds. Instead of that, Louise--do you understand?--air,
liberty, melody of birds, plains of Lombardy, Venetian canals, Roman
palaces, the Bay of Naples. How much have we, Louise?" The young girl to
whom this question was addressed drew from an inlaid secretary desk a
small portfolio with a lock, in which she counted twenty-three bank-
notes.

"Twenty-three thousand francs," said she.

"And as much, at least, in pearls, diamonds, and jewels," said Eugénie.
"We are rich. With forty-five thousand francs we can live like
princesses for two years, and comfortably for four; but before six
months--you with your music, and I with my voice--we shall double our
capital. Come, you shall take charge of the money, I of the jewel-box;
so that if one of us had the misfortune to lose her treasure, the other
would still have hers left. Now, the portmanteau--let us make haste--the
portmanteau!"

"Stop!" said Louise, going to listen at Madame Danglars' door.

"What do you fear?"

"That we may be discovered."

"The door is locked."

"They may tell us to open it."

"They may if they like, but we will not."

"You are a perfect Amazon, Eugénie!" And the two young girls began to
heap into a trunk all the things they thought they should require.
"There now," said Eugénie, "while I change my costume do you lock the
portmanteau." Louise pressed with all the strength of her little hands
on the top of the portmanteau. "But I cannot," said she; "I am not
strong enough; do you shut it."


"Ah, you do well to ask," said Eugénie, laughing; "I forgot that I was
Hercules, and you only the pale Omphale!" And the young girl, kneeling
on the top, pressed the two parts of the portmanteau together, and
Mademoiselle d'Armilly passed the bolt of the padlock through. When this
was done, Eugénie opened a drawer, of which she kept the key, and took
from it a wadded violet silk travelling cloak. "Here," said she, "you
see I have thought of everything; with this cloak you will not be cold."

