wretch! But first of all I must get there."

He went back to the room where he had left Monte Cristo. Five minutes
had sufficed to make a complete transformation in his appearance. His
voice had become rough and hoarse; his face was furrowed with wrinkles;
his eyes burned under the blue-veined lids, and he tottered like a
drunken man. "Count," said he, "I thank you for your hospitality, which
I would gladly have enjoyed longer; but I must return to Paris."

"What has happened?"

"A great misfortune, more important to me than life. Don't question me,
I beg of you, but lend me a horse."

"My stables are at your command, viscount; but you will kill yourself by
riding on horseback. Take a post-chaise or a carriage."

"No, it would delay me, and I need the fatigue you warn me of; it will
do me good." Albert reeled as if he had been shot, and fell on a chair
near the door. Monte Cristo did not see this second manifestation of
physical exhaustion; he was at the window, calling, "Ali, a horse for M.
de Morcerf--quick! he is in a hurry!" These words restored Albert; he
darted from the room, followed by the count. "Thank you!" cried he,
throwing himself on his horse. "Return as soon as you can, Florentin.
Must I use any password to procure a horse?"


"Only dismount; another will be immediately saddled." Albert hesitated a
moment. "You may think my departure strange and foolish," said the young
man; "you do not know how a paragraph in a newspaper may exasperate one.
Read that," said he, "when I am gone, that you may not be witness of my
anger."

While the count picked up the paper he put spurs to his horse, which
leaped in astonishment at such an unusual stimulus, and shot away with
the rapidity of an arrow. The count watched him with a feeling of
compassion, and when he had completely disappeared, read as follows:--

"The French officer in the service of Ali Pasha of Yanina alluded to
three weeks since in _l'Impartial_, who not only surrendered the castle
of Yanina, but sold his benefactor to the Turks, styled himself truly at
that time Fernand, as our esteemed contemporary states; but he has since
added to his Christian name a title of nobility and a family name. He
now calls himself the Count of Morcerf, and ranks among the peers."

Thus the terrible secret, which Beauchamp had so generously destroyed,
appeared again like an armed phantom; and another paper, deriving its
information from some malicious source, had published two days after
Albert's departure for Normandy the few lines which had rendered the
unfortunate young man almost crazy.



Chapter 86. The Trial

At eight o'clock in the morning Albert had arrived at Beauchamp's door.
The valet de chambre had received orders to usher him in at once.
Beauchamp was in his bath. "Here I am," said Albert.

"Well, my poor friend," replied Beauchamp, "I expected you."

"I need not say I think you are too faithful and too kind to have spoken
of that painful circumstance. Your having sent for me is another proof
of your affection. So, without losing time, tell me, have you the
slightest idea whence this terrible blow proceeds?"

"I think I have some clew."

"But first tell me all the particulars of this shameful plot." Beauchamp
proceeded to relate to the young man, who was overwhelmed with shame and
grief, the following facts. Two days previously, the article had
appeared in another paper besides _ l'Impartial_, and, what was more
serious, one that was well known as a government paper. Beauchamp was
breakfasting when he read the paragraph. He sent immediately for a
cabriolet, and hastened to the publisher's office. Although professing
diametrically opposite principles from those of the editor of the other
paper, Beauchamp--as it sometimes, we may say often, happens--was his
intimate friend. The editor was reading, with apparent delight, a
leading article in the same paper on beet-sugar, probably a composition
of his own.

"Ah, _pardieu!_" said Beauchamp, "with the paper in your hand, my
friend, I need not tell you the cause of my visit."

"Are you interested in the sugar question?" asked the editor of the
ministerial paper.

"No," replied Beauchamp, "I have not considered the question; a totally
different subject interests me."

"What is it?"

"The article relative to Morcerf."

"Indeed? Is it not a curious affair?"

"So curious, that I think you are running a great risk of a prosecution
for defamation of character."

"Not at all; we have received with the information all the requisite
proofs, and we are quite sure M. de Morcerf will not raise his voice
against us; besides, it is rendering a service to one's country to
denounce these wretched criminals who are unworthy of the honor bestowed
on them." Beauchamp was thunderstruck. "Who, then, has so correctly
informed you?" asked he; "for my paper, which gave the first information
on the subject, has been obliged to stop for want of proof; and yet we
are more interested than you in exposing M. de Morcerf, as he is a peer
of France, and we are of the opposition."

"Oh, that is very simple; we have not sought to scandalize. This news
was brought to us. A man arrived yesterday from Yanina, bringing a
formidable array of documents; and when we hesitated to publish the
accusatory article, he told us it should be inserted in some other
paper."

Beauchamp understood that nothing remained but to submit, and left the
office to despatch a courier to Morcerf. But he had been unable to send
to Albert the following particulars, as the events had transpired after
the messenger's departure; namely, that the same day a great agitation
was manifest in the House of Peers among the usually calm members of
that dignified assembly. Everyone had arrived almost before the usual
hour, and was conversing on the melancholy event which was to attract
the attention of the public towards one of their most illustrious
colleagues. Some were perusing the article, others making comments and
recalling circumstances which substantiated the charges still more. The
Count of Morcerf was no favorite with his colleagues. Like all upstarts,
he had had recourse to a great deal of haughtiness to maintain his
position. The true nobility laughed at him, the talented repelled him,
and the honorable instinctively despised him. He was, in fact, in the
unhappy position of the victim marked for sacrifice; the finger of God
once pointed at him, everyone was prepared to raise the hue and cry.


The Count of Morcerf alone was ignorant of the news. He did not take in
the paper containing the defamatory article, and had passed the morning
in writing letters and in trying a horse. He arrived at his usual hour,
with a proud look and insolent demeanor; he alighted, passed through the
corridors, and entered the house without observing the hesitation of the
door-keepers or the coolness of his colleagues. Business had already
been going on for half an hour when he entered. Everyone held the
accusing paper, but, as usual, no one liked to take upon himself the
responsibility of the attack. At length an honorable peer, Morcerf's
acknowledged enemy, ascended the tribune with that solemnity which
announced that the expected moment had arrived. There was an impressive
silence; Morcerf alone knew not why such profound attention was given to
an orator who was not always listened to with so much complacency. The
count did not notice the introduction, in which the speaker announced
that his communication would be of that vital importance that it
demanded the undivided attention of the House; but at the mention of
Yanina and Colonel Fernand, he turned so frightfully pale that every
member shuddered and fixed his eyes upon him. Moral wounds have this
peculiarity,--they may be hidden, but they never close; always painful,
always ready to bleed when touched, they remain fresh and open in the
heart.

The article having been read during the painful hush that followed, a
universal shudder pervaded the assembly, and immediately the closest
attention was given to the orator as he resumed his remarks. He stated
his scruples and the difficulties of the case; it was the honor of M. de
Morcerf, and that of the whole House, he proposed to defend, by
provoking a debate on personal questions, which are always such painful
themes of discussion. He concluded by calling for an investigation,
which might dispose of the calumnious report before it had time to
spread, and restore M. de Morcerf to the position he had long held in
public opinion. Morcerf was so completely overwhelmed by this great and
unexpected calamity that he could scarcely stammer a few words as he
looked around on the assembly. This timidity, which might proceed from
the astonishment of innocence as well as the shame of guilt, conciliated
some in his favor; for men who are truly generous are always ready to
compassionate when the misfortune of their enemy surpasses the limits of
their hatred.


The president put it to the vote, and it was decided that the
investigation should take place. The count was asked what time he
required to prepare his defence. Morcerf's courage had revived when he
found himself alive after this horrible blow. "My lords," answered he,
"it is not by time I could repel the attack made on me by enemies
unknown to me, and, doubtless, hidden in obscurity; it is immediately,
and by a thunderbolt, that I must repel the flash of lightning which,
for a moment, startled me. Oh, that I could, instead of taking up this
defence, shed my last drop of blood to prove to my noble colleagues that
I am their equal in worth." These words made a favorable impression on
behalf of the accused. "I demand, then, that the examination shall take
place as soon as possible, and I will furnish the house with all
necessary information."

"What day do you fix?" asked the president.

"Today I am at your service," replied the count. The president rang the
bell. "Does the House approve that the examination should take place
today?"

"Yes," was the unanimous answer.

A committee of twelve members was chosen to examine the proofs brought
forward by Morcerf. The investigation would begin at eight o'clock that
evening in the committee-room, and if postponement were necessary, the
proceedings would be resumed each evening at the same hour. Morcerf
asked leave to retire; he had to collect the documents he had long been
