
"Very good, father-in-law," said Cavalcanti, yielding to his low-born
nature, which would escape sometimes through the aristocratic gloss with
which he sought to conceal it. Correcting himself immediately, he said,
"Excuse me, sir; hope alone makes me almost mad,--what will not reality
do?"

"But," said Danglars, who, on his part, did not perceive how soon the
conversation, which was at first disinterested, was turning to a
business transaction, "there is, doubtless, a part of your fortune your
father could not refuse you?"

"Which?" asked the young man.

"That you inherit from your mother."

"Truly, from my mother, Leonora Corsinari."

"How much may it amount to?"

"Indeed, sir," said Andrea, "I assure you I have never given the subject
a thought, but I suppose it must have been at least two millions."
Danglars felt as much overcome with joy as the miser who finds a lost
treasure, or as the shipwrecked mariner who feels himself on solid
ground instead of in the abyss which he expected would swallow him up.

"Well, sir," said Andrea, bowing to the banker respectfully, "may I
hope?"

"You may not only hope," said Danglars, "but consider it a settled
thing, if no obstacle arises on your part."

"I am, indeed, rejoiced," said Andrea.

"But," said Danglars thoughtfully, "how is it that your patron, M. de
Monte Cristo, did not make his proposal for you?" Andrea blushed
imperceptibly. "I have just left the count, sir," said he; "he is,
doubtless, a delightful man but inconceivably peculiar in his ideas. He
esteems me highly. He even told me he had not the slightest doubt that
my father would give me the capital instead of the interest of my
property. He has promised to use his influence to obtain it for me; but
he also declared that he never had taken on himself the responsibility
of making proposals for another, and he never would. I must, however, do
him the justice to add that he assured me if ever he had regretted the
repugnance he felt to such a step it was on this occasion, because he
thought the projected union would be a happy and suitable one. Besides,
if he will do nothing officially, he will answer any questions you
propose to him. And now," continued he, with one of his most charming
smiles, "having finished talking to the father-in-law, I must address
myself to the banker."

"And what may you have to say to him?" said Danglars, laughing in his
turn.

"That the day after tomorrow I shall have to draw upon you for about
four thousand francs; but the count, expecting my bachelor's revenue
could not suffice for the coming month's outlay, has offered me a draft
for twenty thousand francs. It bears his signature, as you see, which is
all-sufficient."

"Bring me a million such as that," said Danglars, "I shall be well
pleased," putting the draft in his pocket. "Fix your own hour for
tomorrow, and my cashier shall call on you with a check for eighty
thousand francs."

"At ten o'clock then, if you please; I should like it early, as I am
going into the country tomorrow."

"Very well, at ten o'clock; you are still at the Hôtel des Princes?"

"Yes."

The following morning, with the banker's usual punctuality, the eighty
thousand francs were placed in the young man's hands as he was on the
point of starting, after having left two hundred francs for Caderousse.
He went out chiefly to avoid this dangerous enemy, and returned as late
as possible in the evening. But scarcely had he stepped out of his
carriage when the porter met him with a parcel in his hand.

"Sir," said he, "that man has been here."

"What man?" said Andrea carelessly, apparently forgetting him whom he
but too well recollected.

"Him to whom your excellency pays that little annuity."

"Oh," said Andrea, "my father's old servant. Well, you gave him the two
hundred francs I had left for him?"

"Yes, your excellency." Andrea had expressed a wish to be thus
addressed. "But," continued the porter, "he would not take them." Andrea
turned pale, but as it was dark his pallor was not perceptible. "What?
he would not take them?" said he with slight emotion.


"No, he wished to speak to your excellency; I told him you were gone
out, and after some dispute he believed me and gave me this letter,
which he had brought with him already sealed."

"Give it me," said Andrea, and he read by the light of his carriage-
lamp,--

"You know where I live; I expect you tomorrow morning at nine o'clock."

Andrea examined it carefully, to ascertain if the letter had been
opened, or if any indiscreet eyes had seen its contents; but it was so
carefully folded, that no one could have read it, and the seal was
perfect. "Very well," said he. "Poor man, he is a worthy creature." He
left the porter to ponder on these words, not knowing which most to
admire, the master or the servant. "Take out the horses quickly, and
come up to me," said Andrea to his groom. In two seconds the young man
had reached his room and burnt Caderousse's letter. The servant entered
just as he had finished. "You are about my height, Pierre," said he.

"I have that honor, your excellency."

"You had a new livery yesterday?"

"Yes, sir."

"I have an engagement with a pretty little girl for this evening, and do
not wish to be known; lend me your livery till tomorrow. I may sleep,
perhaps, at an inn."

Pierre obeyed. Five minutes after, Andrea left the hotel, completely
disguised, took a cabriolet, and ordered the driver to take him to the
Cheval Rouge, at Picpus. The next morning he left that inn as he had
left the Hôtel des Princes, without being noticed, walked down the
Faubourg Saint-Antoine, along the boulevard to Rue Ménilmontant, and
stopping at the door of the third house on the left looked for someone
of whom to make inquiry in the porter's absence. "For whom are you
looking, my fine fellow?" asked the fruiteress on the opposite side.

"Monsieur Pailletin, if you please, my good woman," replied Andrea.

"A retired baker?" asked the fruiteress.

"Exactly."

"He lives at the end of the yard, on the left, on the third story."
Andrea went as she directed him, and on the third floor he found a
hare's paw, which, by the hasty ringing of the bell, it was evident he
pulled with considerable ill-temper. A moment after Caderousse's face
appeared at the grating in the door. "Ah, you are punctual," said he, as
he drew back the door.

"Confound you and your punctuality!" said Andrea, throwing himself into
a chair in a manner which implied that he would rather have flung it at
the head of his host.

"Come, come, my little fellow, don't be angry. See, I have thought about
you--look at the good breakfast we are going to have; nothing but what
you are fond of." Andrea, indeed, inhaled the scent of something cooking
which was not unwelcome to him, hungry as he was; it was that mixture of
fat and garlic peculiar to Provençal kitchens of an inferior order,
added to that of dried fish, and above all, the pungent smell of musk
and cloves. These odors escaped from two deep dishes which were covered
and placed on a stove, and from a copper pan placed in an old iron pot.
In an adjoining room Andrea saw also a tolerably clean table prepared
for two, two bottles of wine sealed, the one with green, the other with
yellow, a supply of brandy in a decanter, and a measure of fruit in a
cabbage-leaf, cleverly arranged on an earthenware plate.


"What do you think of it, my little fellow?" said Caderousse. "Ay, that
smells good! You know I used to be a famous cook; do you recollect how
you used to lick your fingers? You were among the first who tasted any
of my dishes, and I think you relished them tolerably." While speaking,
Caderousse went on peeling a fresh supply of onions.

"But," said Andrea, ill-temperedly, "by my faith, if it was only to
breakfast with you, that you disturbed me, I wish the devil had taken
you!"

"My boy," said Caderousse sententiously, "one can talk while eating. And
then, you ungrateful being, you are not pleased to see an old friend? I
am weeping with joy." He was truly crying, but it would have been
difficult to say whether joy or the onions produced the greatest effect
on the lachrymal glands of the old innkeeper of the Pont-du-Gard. "Hold
your tongue, hypocrite," said Andrea; "you love me!"

"Yes, I do, or may the devil take me. I know it is a weakness," said
Caderousse, "but it overpowers me."

"And yet it has not prevented your sending for me to play me some
trick."

"Come," said Caderousse, wiping his large knife on his apron, "if I did
not like you, do you think I should endure the wretched life you lead
me? Think for a moment. You have your servant's clothes on--you
therefore keep a servant; I have none, and am obliged to prepare my own
meals. You abuse my cookery because you dine at the table d'hôte of the
Hôtel des Princes, or the Café de Paris. Well, I too could keep a
servant; I too could have a tilbury; I too could dine where I like; but
why do I not? Because I would not annoy my little Benedetto. Come, just
acknowledge that I could, eh?" This address was accompanied by a look
which was by no means difficult to understand. "Well," said Andrea,
"admitting your love, why do you want me to breakfast with you?"

"That I may have the pleasure of seeing you, my little fellow."
