"So young," said Albert, forgetting at the moment the Count's command
that he should ask no questions of the slave herself, "is it possible
that you can have known what suffering is except by name?"

Haydée turned her eyes towards Monte Cristo, who, making at the same
time some imperceptible sign, murmured,--"Go on."

"Nothing is ever so firmly impressed on the mind as the memory of our
early childhood, and with the exception of the two scenes I have just
described to you, all my earliest reminiscences are fraught with deepest
sadness."

"Speak, speak, signora," said Albert, "I am listening with the most
intense delight and interest to all you say."


Haydée answered his remark with a melancholy smile. "You wish me, then,
to relate the history of my past sorrows?" said she.

"I beg you to do so," replied Albert.

"Well, I was but four years old when one night I was suddenly awakened
by my mother. We were in the palace of Yanina; she snatched me from the
cushions on which I was sleeping, and on opening my eyes I saw hers
filled with tears. She took me away without speaking. When I saw her
weeping I began to cry too. 'Hush, child!' said she. At other times in
spite of maternal endearments or threats, I had with a child's caprice
been accustomed to indulge my feelings of sorrow or anger by crying as
much as I felt inclined; but on this occasion there was an intonation of
such extreme terror in my mother's voice when she enjoined me to
silence, that I ceased crying as soon as her command was given. She bore
me rapidly away.

"I saw then that we were descending a large staircase; around us were
all my mother's servants carrying trunks, bags, ornaments, jewels,
purses of gold, with which they were hurrying away in the greatest
distraction.

"Behind the women came a guard of twenty men armed with long guns and
pistols, and dressed in the costume which the Greeks have assumed since
they have again become a nation. You may imagine there was something
startling and ominous," said Haydée, shaking her head and turning pale
at the mere remembrance of the scene, "in this long file of slaves and
women only half-aroused from sleep, or at least so they appeared to me,
who was myself scarcely awake. Here and there on the walls of the
staircase, were reflected gigantic shadows, which trembled in the
flickering light of the pine-torches till they seemed to reach to the
vaulted roof above.

"'Quick!' said a voice at the end of the gallery. This voice made
everyone bow before it, resembling in its effect the wind passing over a
field of wheat, by its superior strength forcing every ear to yield
obeisance. As for me, it made me tremble. This voice was that of my
father. He came last, clothed in his splendid robes and holding in his
hand the carbine which your emperor presented him. He was leaning on the
shoulder of his favorite Selim, and he drove us all before him, as a
shepherd would his straggling flock. My father," said Haydée, raising
her head, "was that illustrious man known in Europe under the name of
Ali Tepelini, pasha of Yanina, and before whom Turkey trembled."

Albert, without knowing why, started on hearing these words pronounced
with such a haughty and dignified accent; it appeared to him as if there
was something supernaturally gloomy and terrible in the expression which
gleamed from the brilliant eyes of Haydée at this moment; she appeared
like a Pythoness evoking a spectre, as she recalled to his mind the
remembrance of the fearful death of this man, to the news of which all
Europe had listened with horror. "Soon," said Haydée, "we halted on our
march, and found ourselves on the borders of a lake. My mother pressed
me to her throbbing heart, and at the distance of a few paces I saw my
father, who was glancing anxiously around. Four marble steps led down to
the water's edge, and below them was a boat floating on the tide.


"From where we stood I could see in the middle of the lake a large blank
mass; it was the kiosk to which we were going. This kiosk appeared to me
to be at a considerable distance, perhaps on account of the darkness of
the night, which prevented any object from being more than partially
discerned. We stepped into the boat. I remember well that the oars made
no noise whatever in striking the water, and when I leaned over to
ascertain the cause I saw that they were muffled with the sashes of our
Palikares. [*] Besides the rowers, the boat contained only the women, my
father, mother, Selim, and myself. The Palikares had remained on the
shore of the lake, ready to cover our retreat; they were kneeling on the
lowest of the marble steps, and in that manner intended making a rampart
of the three others, in case of pursuit. Our bark flew before the wind.
'Why does the boat go so fast?' asked I of my mother.


* Greek militiamen in the war for independence.--Ed.

"'Silence, child! Hush, we are flying!' I did not understand. Why should
my father fly?--he, the all-powerful--he, before whom others were
accustomed to fly--he, who had taken for his device, '_They hate me;
then they fear me!_' It was, indeed, a flight which my father was trying
to effect. I have been told since that the garrison of the castle of
Yanina, fatigued with long service----"

Here Haydée cast a significant glance at Monte Cristo, whose eyes had
been riveted on her countenance during the whole course of her
narrative. The young girl then continued, speaking slowly, like a person
who is either inventing or suppressing some feature of the history which
he is relating. "You were saying, signora," said Albert, who was paying
the most implicit attention to the recital, "that the garrison of
Yanina, fatigued with long service----"

"Had treated with the Seraskier [*] Koorshid, who had been sent by the
sultan to gain possession of the person of my father; it was then that
Ali Tepelini--after having sent to the sultan a French officer in whom
he reposed great confidence--resolved to retire to the asylum which he
had long before prepared for himself, and which he called _kataphygion_,
or the refuge."

"And this officer," asked Albert, "do you remember his name, signora?"
Monte Cristo exchanged a rapid glance with the young girl, which was
quite unperceived by Albert. "No," said she, "I do not remember it just
at this moment; but if it should occur to me presently, I will tell
you." Albert was on the point of pronouncing his father's name, when
Monte Cristo gently held up his finger in token of reproach; the young
man recollected his promise, and was silent.


* A Turkish pasha in command of the troops of a province.--Ed.

"It was towards this kiosk that we were rowing. A ground floor,
ornamented with arabesques, bathing its terraces in the water, and
another floor, looking on the lake, was all which was visible to the
eye. But beneath the ground floor, stretching out into the island, was a
large subterranean cavern, to which my mother, myself, and the women
were conducted. In this place were together 60,000. pouches and 200
barrels; the pouches contained 25,000,000 of money in gold, and the
barrels were filled with 30,000. pounds of gunpowder.

"Near the barrels stood Selim, my father's favorite, whom I mentioned to
you just now. He stood watch day and night with a lance provided with a
lighted slowmatch in his hand, and he had orders to blow up everything--
kiosk, guards, women, gold, and Ali Tepelini himself--at the first
signal given by my father. I remember well that the slaves, convinced of
the precarious tenure on which they held their lives, passed whole days
and nights in praying, crying, and groaning. As for me, I can never
forget the pale complexion and black eyes of the young soldier, and
whenever the angel of death summons me to another world, I am quite sure
I shall recognize Selim. I cannot tell you how long we remained in this
state; at that period I did not even know what time meant. Sometimes,
but very rarely, my father summoned me and my mother to the terrace of
the palace; these were hours of recreation for me, as I never saw
anything in the dismal cavern but the gloomy countenances of the slaves
and Selim's fiery lance. My father was endeavoring to pierce with his
eager looks the remotest verge of the horizon, examining attentively
every black speck which appeared on the lake, while my mother, reclining
by his side, rested her head on his shoulder, and I played at his feet,
admiring everything I saw with that unsophisticated innocence of
childhood which throws a charm round objects insignificant in
themselves, but which in its eyes are invested with the greatest
importance. The heights of Pindus towered above us; the castle of Yanina
rose white and angular from the blue waters of the lake, and the immense
masses of black vegetation which, viewed in the distance, gave the idea
of lichens clinging to the rocks, were in reality gigantic fir-trees and
myrtles.

"One morning my father sent for us; my mother had been crying all the
night, and was very wretched; we found the pasha calm, but paler than
usual. 'Take courage, Vasiliki,' said he; 'today arrives the firman of
the master, and my fate will be decided. If my pardon be complete, we
shall return triumphant to Yanina; if the news be inauspicious, we must
fly this night.'--'But supposing our enemy should not allow us to do
so?' said my mother. 'Oh, make yourself easy on that head,' said Ali,
smiling; 'Selim and his flaming lance will settle that matter. They
would be glad to see me dead, but they would not like themselves to die
with me.'

"My mother only answered by sighs to consolations which she knew did not
come from my father's heart. She prepared the iced water which he was in
the habit of constantly drinking,--for since his sojourn at the kiosk he
had been parched by the most violent fever,--after which she anointed
his white beard with perfumed oil, and lighted his chibouque, which he
sometimes smoked for hours together, quietly watching the wreaths of
vapor that ascended in spiral clouds and gradually melted away in the
surrounding atmosphere. Presently he made such a sudden movement that I
was paralyzed with fear. Then, without taking his eyes from the object
which had first attracted his attention, he asked for his telescope. My
mother gave it him, and as she did so, looked whiter than the marble
against which she leaned. I saw my father's hand tremble. 'A boat!--
two!--three!' murmured my, father;--'four!' He then arose, seizing his
arms and priming his pistols. 'Vasiliki,' said he to my mother,
trembling perceptibly, 'the instant approaches which will decide
everything. In the space of half an hour we shall know the emperor's
answer. Go into the cavern with Haydée.'--'I will not quit you,' said
Vasiliki; 'if you die, my lord, I will die with you.'--'Go to Selim!'
cried my father. 'Adieu, my lord,' murmured my mother, determining
quietly to await the approach of death. 'Take away Vasiliki!' said my
father to his Palikares.

"As for me, I had been forgotten in the general confusion; I ran toward
Ali Tepelini; he saw me hold out my arms to him, and he stooped down and
pressed my forehead with his lips. Oh, how distinctly I remember that
kiss!--it was the last he ever gave me, and I feel as if it were still
warm on my forehead. On descending, we saw through the lattice-work
several boats which were gradually becoming more distinct to our view.
At first they appeared like black specks, and now they looked like birds
skimming the surface of the waves. During this time, in the kiosk at my
