"Tell me what it is."

"Is my wife's fortune five hundred thousand livres?"

"That is the sum M. Danglars himself announced."

"Must I receive it, or leave it in the hands of the notary?"

"This is the way such affairs are generally arranged when it is wished
to do them stylishly: Your two solicitors appoint a meeting, when the
contract is signed, for the next or the following day; then they
exchange the two portions, for which they each give a receipt; then,
when the marriage is celebrated, they place the amount at your disposal
as the chief member of the alliance."

"Because," said Andrea, with a certain ill-concealed uneasiness, "I
thought I heard my father-in-law say that he intended embarking our
property in that famous railway affair of which you spoke just now."

"Well," replied Monte Cristo, "it will be the way, everybody says, of
trebling your fortune in twelve months. Baron Danglars is a good father,
and knows how to calculate."

"In that case," said Andrea, "everything is all right, excepting your
refusal, which quite grieves me."

"You must attribute it only to natural scruples under similar
circumstances."

"Well," said Andrea, "let it be as you wish. This evening, then, at nine
o'clock."

"Adieu till then." Notwithstanding a slight resistance on the part of
Monte Cristo, whose lips turned pale, but who preserved his ceremonious
smile, Andrea seized the count's hand, pressed it, jumped into his
phaeton, and disappeared.

The four or five remaining hours before nine o'clock arrived, Andrea
employed in riding, paying visits,--designed to induce those of whom he
had spoken to appear at the banker's in their gayest equipages,--
dazzling them by promises of shares in schemes which have since turned
every brain, and in which Danglars was just taking the initiative. In
fact, at half-past eight in the evening the grand salon, the gallery
adjoining, and the three other drawing-rooms on the same floor, were
filled with a perfumed crowd, who sympathized but little in the event,
but who all participated in that love of being present wherever there is
anything fresh to be seen. An Academician would say that the
entertainments of the fashionable world are collections of flowers which
attract inconstant butterflies, famished bees, and buzzing drones.


No one could deny that the rooms were splendidly illuminated; the light
streamed forth on the gilt mouldings and the silk hangings; and all the
bad taste of decorations, which had only their richness to boast of,
shone in its splendor. Mademoiselle Eugénie was dressed with elegant
simplicity in a figured white silk dress, and a white rose half
concealed in her jet black hair was her only ornament, unaccompanied by
a single jewel. Her eyes, however, betrayed that perfect confidence
which contradicted the girlish simplicity of this modest attire. Madame
Danglars was chatting at a short distance with Debray, Beauchamp, and
Château-Renaud.

Debray was admitted to the house for this grand ceremony, but on the
same plane with everyone else, and without any particular privilege. M.
Danglars, surrounded by deputies and men connected with the revenue, was
explaining a new theory of taxation which he intended to adopt when the
course of events had compelled the government to call him into the
ministry. Andrea, on whose arm hung one of the most consummate dandies
of the Opera, was explaining to him rather cleverly, since he was
obliged to be bold to appear at ease, his future projects, and the new
luxuries he meant to introduce to Parisian fashions with his hundred and
seventy-five thousand livres per annum.

The crowd moved to and fro in the rooms like an ebb and flow of
turquoises, rubies, emeralds, opals, and diamonds. As usual, the oldest
women were the most decorated, and the ugliest the most conspicuous. If
there was a beautiful lily, or a sweet rose, you had to search for it,
concealed in some corner behind a mother with a turban, or an aunt with
a bird of paradise.

At each moment, in the midst of the crowd, the buzzing, and the
laughter, the door-keeper's voice was heard announcing some name well
known in the financial department, respected in the army, or illustrious
in the literary world, and which was acknowledged by a slight movement
in the different groups. But for one whose privilege it was to agitate
that ocean of human waves, how many were received with a look of
indifference or a sneer of disdain! At the moment when the hand of the
massive time-piece, representing Endymion asleep, pointed to nine on its
golden face, and the hammer, the faithful type of mechanical thought,
struck nine times, the name of the Count of Monte Cristo resounded in
its turn, and as if by an electric shock all the assembly turned towards
the door.


The count was dressed in black and with his habitual simplicity; his
white waistcoat displayed his expansive noble chest and his black stock
was singularly noticeable because of its contrast with the deadly
paleness of his face. His only jewellery was a chain, so fine that the
slender gold thread was scarcely perceptible on his white waistcoat. A
circle was immediately formed around the door. The count perceived at
one glance Madame Danglars at one end of the drawing-room, M. Danglars
at the other, and Eugénie in front of him. He first advanced towards the
baroness, who was chatting with Madame de Villefort, who had come alone,
Valentine being still an invalid; and without turning aside, so clear
was the road left for him, he passed from the baroness to Eugénie, whom
he complimented in such rapid and measured terms, that the proud artist
was quite struck. Near her was Mademoiselle Louise d'Armilly, who
thanked the count for the letters of introduction he had so kindly given
her for Italy, which she intended immediately to make use of. On leaving
these ladies he found himself with Danglars, who had advanced to meet
him.

Having accomplished these three social duties, Monte Cristo stopped,
looking around him with that expression peculiar to a certain class,
which seems to say, "I have done my duty, now let others do theirs."
Andrea, who was in an adjoining room, had shared in the sensation caused
by the arrival of Monte Cristo, and now came forward to pay his respects
to the count. He found him completely surrounded; all were eager to
speak to him, as is always the case with those whose words are few and
weighty. The solicitors arrived at this moment and arranged their
scrawled papers on the velvet cloth embroidered with gold which covered
the table prepared for the signature; it was a gilt table supported on
lions' claws. One of the notaries sat down, the other remained standing.
They were about to proceed to the reading of the contract, which half
Paris assembled was to sign. All took their places, or rather the ladies
formed a circle, while the gentlemen (more indifferent to the restraints
of what Boileau calls the _style énergique_) commented on the feverish
agitation of Andrea, on M. Danglars' riveted attention, Eugénie's
composure, and the light and sprightly manner in which the baroness
treated this important affair.

The contract was read during a profound silence. But as soon as it was
finished, the buzz was redoubled through all the drawing-rooms; the
brilliant sums, the rolling millions which were to be at the command of
the two young people, and which crowned the display of the wedding
presents and the young lady's diamonds, which had been made in a room
entirely appropriated for that purpose, had exercised to the full their
delusions over the envious assembly. Mademoiselle Danglars' charms were
heightened in the opinion of the young men, and for the moment seemed to
outvie the sun in splendor. As for the ladies, it is needless to say
that while they coveted the millions, they thought they did not need
them for themselves, as they were beautiful enough without them. Andrea,
surrounded by his friends, complimented, flattered, beginning to believe
in the reality of his dream, was almost bewildered. The notary solemnly
took the pen, flourished it above his head, and said, "Gentlemen, we are
about to sign the contract."

The baron was to sign first, then the representative of M. Cavalcanti,
senior, then the baroness, afterwards the "future couple," as they are
styled in the abominable phraseology of legal documents. The baron took
the pen and signed, then the representative. The baroness approached,
leaning on Madame de Villefort's arm. "My dear," said she, as she took
the pen, "is it not vexatious? An unexpected incident, in the affair of
murder and theft at the Count of Monte Cristo's, in which he nearly fell
a victim, deprives us of the pleasure of seeing M. de Villefort."

"Indeed?" said M. Danglars, in the same tone in which he would have
said, "Oh, well, what do I care?"

"As a matter of fact," said Monte Cristo, approaching, "I am much afraid
that I am the involuntary cause of his absence."

"What, you, count?" said Madame Danglars, signing; "if you are, take
care, for I shall never forgive you." Andrea pricked up his ears.

"But it is not my fault, as I shall endeavor to prove." Everyone
listened eagerly; Monte Cristo who so rarely opened his lips, was about
to speak. "You remember," said the count, during the most profound
silence, "that the unhappy wretch who came to rob me died at my house;
the supposition is that he was stabbéd by his accomplice, on attempting
to leave it."

"Yes," said Danglars.

"In order that his wounds might be examined he was undressed, and his
clothes were thrown into a corner, where the police picked them up, with
the exception of the waistcoat, which they overlooked." Andrea turned
pale, and drew towards the door; he saw a cloud rising in the horizon,
which appeared to forebode a coming storm.

"Well, this waistcoat was discovered today, covered with blood, and with
a hole over the heart." The ladies screamed, and two or three prepared
to faint. "It was brought to me. No one could guess what the dirty rag
could be; I alone suspected that it was the waistcoat of the murdered
man. My valet, in examining this mournful relic, felt a paper in the
pocket and drew it out; it was a letter addressed to you, baron."

"To me?" cried Danglars.

"Yes, indeed, to you; I succeeded in deciphering your name under the
blood with which the letter was stained," replied Monte Cristo, amid the
general outburst of amazement.

"But," asked Madame Danglars, looking at her husband with uneasiness,
"how could that prevent M. de Villefort----"

"In this simple way, madame," replied Monte Cristo; "the waistcoat and
the letter were both what is termed circumstantial evidence; I therefore
sent them to the king's attorney. You understand, my dear baron, that
legal methods are the safest in criminal cases; it was, perhaps, some
