Spare me, then, I beseech you. When I look at this room,--whence so many
guilty creatures have departed, trembling and ashamed, when I look at
that chair before which I now sit trembling and ashamed,--oh, it
requires all my reason to convince me that I am not a very guilty woman
and you a menacing judge." Villefort dropped his head and sighed. "And
I," he said, "I feel that my place is not in the judge's seat, but on
the prisoner's stool."


"You?" said Madame Danglars.

"Yes, I."

"I think, sir, you exaggerate your situation," said Madame Danglars,
whose beautiful eyes sparkled for a moment. "The paths of which you were
just speaking have been traced by all young men of ardent imaginations.
Besides the pleasure, there is always remorse from the indulgence of our
passions, and, after all, what have you men to fear from all this? the
world excuses, and notoriety ennobles you."

"Madame," replied Villefort, "you know that I am no hypocrite, or, at
least, that I never deceive without a reason. If my brow be severe, it
is because many misfortunes have clouded it; if my heart be petrified,
it is that it might sustain the blows it has received. I was not so in
my youth, I was not so on the night of the betrothal, when we were all
seated around a table in the Rue du Cours at Marseilles. But since then
everything has changed in and about me; I am accustomed to brave
difficulties, and, in the conflict to crush those who, by their own free
will, or by chance, voluntarily or involuntarily, interfere with me in
my career. It is generally the case that what we most ardently desire is
as ardently withheld from us by those who wish to obtain it, or from
whom we attempt to snatch it. Thus, the greater number of a man's errors
come before him disguised under the specious form of necessity; then,
after error has been committed in a moment of excitement, of delirium,
or of fear, we see that we might have avoided and escaped it. The means
we might have used, which we in our blindness could not see, then seem
simple and easy, and we say, 'Why did I not do this, instead of that?'
Women, on the contrary, are rarely tormented with remorse; for the
decision does not come from you,--your misfortunes are generally imposed
upon you, and your faults the results of others' crimes."

"In any case, sir, you will allow," replied Madame Danglars, "that, even
if the fault were alone mine, I last night received a severe punishment
for it."

"Poor thing," said Villefort, pressing her hand, "it was too severe for
your strength, for you were twice overwhelmed, and yet----"

"Well?"

"Well, I must tell you. Collect all your courage, for you have not yet
heard all."

"Ah," exclaimed Madame Danglars, alarmed, "what is there more to hear?"

"You only look back to the past, and it is, indeed, bad enough. Well,
picture to yourself a future more gloomy still--certainly frightful,
perhaps sanguinary!"

The baroness knew how calm Villefort naturally was, and his present
excitement frightened her so much that she opened her mouth to scream,
but the sound died in her throat. "How has this terrible past been
recalled?" cried Villefort; "how is it that it has escaped from the
depths of the tomb and the recesses of our hearts, where it was buried,
to visit us now, like a phantom, whitening our cheeks and flushing our
brows with shame?"

"Alas," said Hermine, "doubtless it is chance."

"Chance?" replied Villefort; "No, no, madame, there is no such thing as
chance."

"Oh, yes; has not a fatal chance revealed all this? Was it not by chance
the Count of Monte Cristo bought that house? Was it not by chance he
caused the earth to be dug up? Is it not by chance that the unfortunate
child was disinterred under the trees?--that poor innocent offspring of
mine, which I never even kissed, but for whom I wept many, many tears.
Ah, my heart clung to the count when he mentioned the dear spoil found
beneath the flowers."

"Well, no, madame,--this is the terrible news I have to tell you," said
Villefort in a hollow voice--"no, nothing was found beneath the flowers;
there was no child disinterred--no. You must not weep, no, you must not
groan, you must tremble!"

"What can you mean?" asked Madame Danglars, shuddering.

"I mean that M. de Monte Cristo, digging underneath these trees, found
neither skeleton nor chest, because neither of them was there!"

"Neither of them there?" repeated Madame Danglars, her staring, wide-
open eyes expressing her alarm.

"Neither of them there!" she again said, as though striving to impress
herself with the meaning of the words which escaped her.

"No," said Villefort, burying his face in his hands, "no, a hundred
times no!"

"Then you did not bury the poor child there, sir? Why did you deceive
me? Where did you place it? tell me--where?"

"There! But listen to me--listen--and you will pity me who has for
twenty years alone borne the heavy burden of grief I am about to reveal,
without casting the least portion upon you."

"Oh, you frighten me! But speak; I will listen."

"You recollect that sad night, when you were half-expiring on that bed
in the red damask room, while I, scarcely less agitated than you,
awaited your delivery. The child was born, was given to me--motionless,
breathless, voiceless; we thought it dead." Madame Danglars moved
rapidly, as though she would spring from her chair, but Villefort
stopped, and clasped his hands as if to implore her attention. "We
thought it dead," he repeated; "I placed it in the chest, which was to
take the place of a coffin; I descended to the garden, I dug a hole, and
then flung it down in haste. Scarcely had I covered it with earth, when
the arm of the Corsican was stretched towards me; I saw a shadow rise,
and, at the same time, a flash of light. I felt pain; I wished to cry
out, but an icy shiver ran through my veins and stifled my voice; I fell
lifeless, and fancied myself killed. Never shall I forget your sublime
courage, when, having returned to consciousness, I dragged myself to the
foot of the stairs, and you, almost dying yourself, came to meet me. We
were obliged to keep silent upon the dreadful catastrophe. You had the
fortitude to regain the house, assisted by your nurse. A duel was the
pretext for my wound. Though we scarcely expected it, our secret
remained in our own keeping alone. I was taken to Versailles; for three
months I struggled with death; at last, as I seemed to cling to life, I
was ordered to the South. Four men carried me from Paris to Châlons,
walking six leagues a day; Madame de Villefort followed the litter in
her carriage. At Châlons I was put upon the Saône, thence I passed on to
the Rhône, whence I descended, merely with the current, to Arles; at
Arles I was again placed on my litter, and continued my journey to
Marseilles. My recovery lasted six months. I never heard you mentioned,
and I did not dare inquire for you. When I returned to Paris, I learned
that you, the widow of M. de Nargonne, had married M. Danglars.

"What was the subject of my thoughts from the time consciousness
returned to me? Always the same--always the child's corpse, coming every
night in my dreams, rising from the earth, and hovering over the grave
with menacing look and gesture. I inquired immediately on my return to
Paris; the house had not been inhabited since we left it, but it had
just been let for nine years. I found the tenant. I pretended that I
disliked the idea that a house belonging to my wife's father and mother
should pass into the hands of strangers. I offered to pay them for
cancelling the lease; they demanded 6,000 francs. I would have given
10,000--I would have given 20,000. I had the money with me; I made the
tenant sign the deed of resilition, and when I had obtained what I so
much wanted, I galloped to Auteuil.

"No one had entered the house since I had left it. It was five o'clock
in the afternoon; I ascended into the red room, and waited for night.
There all the thoughts which had disturbed me during my year of constant
agony came back with double force. The Corsican, who had declared the
vendetta against me, who had followed me from Nîmes to Paris, who had
hid himself in the garden, who had struck me, had seen me dig the grave,
had seen me inter the child,--he might become acquainted with your
person,--nay, he might even then have known it. Would he not one day
make you pay for keeping this terrible secret? Would it not be a sweet
revenge for him when he found that I had not died from the blow of his
dagger? It was therefore necessary, before everything else, and at all
risks, that I should cause all traces of the past to disappear--that I
should destroy every material vestige; too much reality would always
remain in my recollection. It was for this I had annulled the lease--it
was for this I had come--it was for this I was waiting. Night arrived; I
allowed it to become quite dark. I was without a light in that room;
when the wind shook all the doors, behind which I continually expected
to see some spy concealed, I trembled. I seemed everywhere to hear your
moans behind me in the bed, and I dared not turn around. My heart beat
so violently that I feared my wound would open. At length, one by one,
all the noises in the neighborhood ceased. I understood that I had
nothing to fear, that I should neither be seen nor heard, so I decided
upon descending to the garden.

"Listen, Hermine; I consider myself as brave as most men, but when I
drew from my breast the little key of the staircase, which I had found
in my coat--that little key we both used to cherish so much, which you
wished to have fastened to a golden ring--when I opened the door, and
saw the pale moon shedding a long stream of white light on the spiral
staircase like a spectre, I leaned against the wall, and nearly
shrieked. I seemed to be going mad. At last I mastered my agitation. I
descended the staircase step by step; the only thing I could not conquer
was a strange trembling in my knees. I grasped the railings; if I had
relaxed my hold for a moment, I should have fallen. I reached the lower
door. Outside this door a spade was placed against the wall; I took it,
and advanced towards the thicket. I had provided myself with a dark
lantern. In the middle of the lawn I stopped to light it, then I
continued my path.

"It was the end of November, all the verdure of the garden had
disappeared, the trees were nothing more than skeletons with their long
bony arms, and the dead leaves sounded on the gravel under my feet. My
terror overcame me to such a degree as I approached the thicket, that I
took a pistol from my pocket and armed myself. I fancied continually
that I saw the figure of the Corsican between the branches. I examined
the thicket with my dark lantern; it was empty. I looked carefully
around; I was indeed alone,--no noise disturbed the silence but the owl,
whose piercing cry seemed to be calling up the phantoms of the night. I
tied my lantern to a forked branch I had noticed a year before at the
precise spot where I stopped to dig the hole.
