remained silent and motionless. "Do you know, sir," asked the baroness,
"that you are improving? Generally you are only rude, but tonight you
are brutal."

"It is because I am in a worse humor than usual," replied Danglars.
Hermine looked at the banker with supreme disdain. These glances
frequently exasperated the pride of Danglars, but this evening he took
no notice of them.

"And what have I to do with your ill-humor?" said the baroness,
irritated at the impassibility of her husband; "do these things concern
me? Keep your ill-humor at home in your money boxes, or, since you have
clerks whom you pay, vent it upon them."

"Not so," replied Danglars; "your advice is wrong, so I shall not follow
it. My money boxes are my Pactolus, as, I think, M. Demoustier says, and
I will not retard its course, or disturb its calm. My clerks are honest
men, who earn my fortune, whom I pay much below their deserts, if I may
value them according to what they bring in; therefore I shall not get
into a passion with them; those with whom I will be in a passion are
those who eat my dinners, mount my horses, and exhaust my fortune."

"And pray who are the persons who exhaust your fortune? Explain yourself
more clearly, I beg, sir."

"Oh, make yourself easy!--I am not speaking riddles, and you will soon
know what I mean. The people who exhaust my fortune are those who draw
out 700,000 francs in the course of an hour."

"I do not understand you, sir," said the baroness, trying to disguise
the agitation of her voice and the flush of her face. "You understand me
perfectly, on the contrary," said Danglars: "but, if you will persist, I
will tell you that I have just lost 700,000 francs upon the Spanish
loan."

"And pray," asked the baroness, "am I responsible for this loss?"

"Why not?"

"Is it my fault you have lost 700,000 francs?"

"Certainly it is not mine."

"Once for all, sir," replied the baroness sharply, "I tell you I will
not hear cash named; it is a style of language I never heard in the
house of my parents or in that of my first husband."

"Oh, I can well believe that, for neither of them was worth a penny."

"The better reason for my not being conversant with the slang of the
bank, which is here dinning in my ears from morning to night; that noise
of jingling crowns, which are constantly being counted and re-counted,
is odious to me. I only know one thing I dislike more, which is the
sound of your voice."


"Really?" said Danglars. "Well, this surprises me, for I thought you
took the liveliest interest in all my affairs!"

"I? What could put such an idea into your head?"

"Yourself."

"Ah?--what next?"

"Most assuredly."

"I should like to know upon what occasion?"

"Oh, _mon Dieu!_ that is very easily done. Last February you were the
first who told me of the Haitian funds. You had dreamed that a ship had
entered the harbor at Le Havre, that this ship brought news that a
payment we had looked upon as lost was going to be made. I know how
clear-sighted your dreams are; I therefore purchased immediately as many
shares as I could of the Haitian debt, and I gained 400,000 francs by
it, of which 100,000 have been honestly paid to you. You spent it as you
pleased; that was your business. In March there was a question about a
grant to a railway. Three companies presented themselves, each offering
equal securities. You told me that your instinct,--and although you
pretend to know nothing about speculations, I think on the contrary,
that your comprehension is very clear upon certain affairs,--well, you
told me that your instinct led you to believe the grant would be given
to the company called the Southern. I bought two thirds of the shares of
that company; as you had foreseen, the shares trebled in value, and I
picked up a million, from which 250,000 francs were paid to you for pin-
money. How have you spent this 250,000 francs?--it is no business of
mine."

"When are you coming to the point?" cried the baroness, shivering with
anger and impatience.

"Patience, madame, I am coming to it."

"That's fortunate."

"In April you went to dine at the minister's. You heard a private
conversation respecting Spanish affairs--on the expulsion of Don Carlos.
I bought some Spanish shares. The expulsion took place and I pocketed
600,000 francs the day Charles V. repassed the Bidassoa. Of these
600,000 francs you took 50,000 crowns. They were yours, you disposed of
them according to your fancy, and I asked no questions; but it is not
the less true that you have this year received 500,000 livres."

"Well, sir, and what then?"

"Ah, yes, it was just after this that you spoiled everything."

"Really, your manner of speaking----"

"It expresses my meaning, and that is all I want. Well, three days after
that you talked politics with M. Debray, and you fancied from his words
that Don Carlos had returned to Spain. Well, I sold my shares, the news
got out, and I no longer sold--I gave them away, next day I find the
news was false, and by this false report I have lost 700,000 francs."

"Well?"

"Well, since I gave you a fourth of my gains, I think you owe me a
fourth of my losses; the fourth of 700,000 francs is 175,000 francs."

"What you say is absurd, and I cannot see why M. Debray's name is mixed
up in this affair."


"Because if you do not possess the 175,000 francs I reclaim, you must
have lent them to your friends, and M. Debray is one of your friends."

"For shame!" exclaimed the baroness.

"Oh, let us have no gestures, no screams, no modern drama, or you will
oblige me to tell you that I see Debray leave here, pocketing the whole
of the 500,000 livres you have handed over to him this year, while he
smiles to himself, saying that he has found what the most skilful
players have never discovered--that is, a roulette where he wins without
playing, and is no loser when he loses." The baroness became enraged.
"Wretch!" she cried, "will you dare to tell me you did not know what you
now reproach me with?"

"I do not say that I did know it, and I do not say that I did not know
it. I merely tell you to look into my conduct during the last four years
that we have ceased to be husband and wife, and see whether it has not
always been consistent. Some time after our rupture, you wished to study
music, under the celebrated baritone who made such a successful
appearance at the Théâtre Italien; at the same time I felt inclined to
learn dancing of the _danseuse_ who acquired such a reputation in
London. This cost me, on your account and mine, 100,000 francs. I said
nothing, for we must have peace in the house; and 100,000 francs for a
lady and gentleman to be properly instructed in music and dancing are
not too much. Well, you soon become tired of singing, and you take a
fancy to study diplomacy with the minister's secretary. You understand,
it signifies nothing to me so long as you pay for your lessons out of
your own cash box. But today I find you are drawing on mine, and that
your apprenticeship may cost me 700,000 francs per month. Stop there,
madame, for this cannot last. Either the diplomatist must give his
lessons gratis, and I will tolerate him, or he must never set his foot
again in my house;--do you understand, madame?"

"Oh, this is too much," cried Hermine, choking, "you are worse than
despicable."

"But," continued Danglars, "I find you did not even pause there----"

"Insults!"

"You are right; let us leave these facts alone, and reason coolly. I
have never interfered in your affairs excepting for your good; treat me
in the same way. You say you have nothing to do with my cash box. Be it
so. Do as you like with your own, but do not fill or empty mine.
Besides, how do I know that this was not a political trick, that the
minister enraged at seeing me in the opposition, and jealous of the
popular sympathy I excite, has not concerted with M. Debray to ruin me?"

"A probable thing!"

"Why not? Who ever heard of such an occurrence as this?--a false
telegraphic despatch--it is almost impossible for wrong signals to be
made as they were in the last two telegrams. It was done on purpose for
me--I am sure of it."

"Sir," said the baroness humbly, "are you not aware that the man
employed there was dismissed, that they talked of going to law with him,
that orders were issued to arrest him and that this order would have
been put into execution if he had not escaped by flight, which proves
that he was either mad or guilty? It was a mistake."

"Yes, which made fools laugh, which caused the minister to have a
sleepless night, which has caused the minister's secretaries to blacken
several sheets of paper, but which has cost me 700,000 francs."

"But, sir," said Hermine suddenly, "if all this is, as you say, caused
by M. Debray, why, instead of going direct to him, do you come and tell
me of it? Why, to accuse the man, do you address the woman?"

"Do I know M. Debray?--do I wish to know him?--do I wish to know that he
gives advice?--do I wish to follow it?--do I speculate? No; you do all
this, not I."

"Still it seems to me, that as you profit by it----"

Danglars shrugged his shoulders. "Foolish creature," he exclaimed.
