other was employed in adjusting to her lips the coral tube of a rich
narghile, through whose flexible pipe she drew the smoke fragrant by its
passage through perfumed water. Her attitude, though perfectly natural
for an Eastern woman would, in a European, have been deemed too full of
coquettish straining after effect. Her dress, which was that of the
women of Epirus, consisted of a pair of white satin trousers,
embroidered with pink roses, displaying feet so exquisitely formed and
so delicately fair, that they might well have been taken for Parian
marble, had not the eye been undeceived by their movements as they
constantly shifted in and out of a pair of little slippers with upturned
toes, beautifully ornamented with gold and pearls. She wore a blue and
white-striped vest, with long open sleeves, trimmed with silver loops
and buttons of pearls, and a sort of bodice, which, closing only from
the centre to the waist, exhibited the whole of the ivory throat and
upper part of the bosom; it was fastened with three magnificent diamond
clasps. The junction of the bodice and drawers was entirely concealed by
one of the many-colored scarves, whose brilliant hues and rich silken
fringe have rendered them so precious in the eyes of Parisian belles.
Tilted on one side of her head she had a small cap of gold-colored silk,
embroidered with pearls; while on the other a purple rose mingled its
glowing colors with the luxuriant masses of her hair, of which the
blackness was so intense that it was tinged with blue. The extreme
beauty of the countenance, that shone forth in loveliness that mocked
the vain attempts of dress to augment it, was peculiarly and purely
Grecian; there were the large, dark, melting eyes, the finely formed
nose, the coral lips, and pearly teeth, that belonged to her race and
country. And, to complete the whole, Haydée was in the very springtide
and fulness of youthful charms--she had not yet numbered more than
nineteen or twenty summers.

Monte Cristo summoned the Greek attendant, and bade her inquire whether
it would be agreeable to her mistress to receive his visit. Haydée's
only reply was to direct her servant by a sign to withdraw the
tapestried curtain that hung before the door of her boudoir, the
framework of the opening thus made serving as a sort of border to the
graceful tableau presented by the young girl's picturesque attitude and
appearance. As Monte Cristo approached, she leaned upon the elbow of the
arm that held the narghile, and extending to him her other hand, said,
with a smile of captivating sweetness, in the sonorous language spoken
by the women of Athens and Sparta, "Why demand permission ere you enter?
Are you no longer my master, or have I ceased to be your slave?" Monte
Cristo returned her smile. "Haydée," said he, "you well know."

"Why do you address me so coldly--so distantly?" asked the young Greek.
"Have I by any means displeased you? Oh, if so, punish me as you will;
but do not--do not speak to me in tones and manner so formal and
constrained."

"Haydée," replied the count, "you know that you are now in France, and
are free."

"Free to do what?" asked the young girl.

"Free to leave me."

"Leave you? Why should I leave you?"

"That is not for me to say; but we are now about to mix in society--to
visit and be visited."

"I don't wish to see anybody but you."

"And should you see one whom you could prefer, I would not be so unjust-
---"

"I have never seen anyone I preferred to you, and I have never loved
anyone but you and my father."

"My poor child," replied Monte Cristo, "that is merely because your
father and myself are the only men who have ever talked to you."

"I don't want anybody else to talk to me. My father said I was his
'joy'--you style me your 'love,'--and both of you have called me 'my
child.'"

"Do you remember your father, Haydée?" The young Greek smiled. "He is
here, and here," said she, touching her eyes and her heart. "And where
am I?" inquired Monte Cristo laughingly.

"You?" cried she, with tones of thrilling tenderness, "you are
everywhere!" Monte Cristo took the delicate hand of the young girl in
his, and was about to raise it to his lips, when the simple child of
nature hastily withdrew it, and presented her cheek. "You now
understand, Haydée," said the count, "that from this moment you are
absolutely free; that here you exercise unlimited sway, and are at
liberty to lay aside or continue the costume of your country, as it may
suit your inclination. Within this mansion you are absolute mistress of
your actions, and may go abroad or remain in your apartments as may seem
most agreeable to you. A carriage waits your orders, and Ali and Myrto
will accompany you whithersoever you desire to go. There is but one
favor I would entreat of you."

"Speak."

"Guard carefully the secret of your birth. Make no allusion to the past;
nor upon any occasion be induced to pronounce the names of your
illustrious father or ill-fated mother."

"I have already told you, my lord, that I shall see no one."

"It is possible, Haydée, that so perfect a seclusion, though conformable
with the habits and customs of the East, may not be practicable in
Paris. Endeavor, then, to accustom yourself to our manner of living in
these northern climes as you did to those of Rome, Florence, Milan, and
Madrid; it may be useful to you one of these days, whether you remain
here or return to the East." The young girl raised her tearful eyes
towards Monte Cristo as she said with touching earnestness, "Whether
_we_ return to the East, you mean to say, my lord, do you not?"

"My child," returned Monte Cristo "you know full well that whenever we
part, it will be no fault or wish of mine; the tree forsakes not the
flower--the flower falls from the tree."

"My lord," replied Haydée, "I never will leave you, for I am sure I
could not exist without you."

"My poor girl, in ten years I shall be old, and you will be still
young."

"My father had a long white beard, but I loved him; he was sixty years
old, but to me he was handsomer than all the fine youths I saw."

"Then tell me, Haydée, do you believe you shall be able to accustom
yourself to our present mode of life?"

"Shall I see you?"

"Every day."

"Then what do you fear, my lord?"

"You might find it dull."

"No, my lord. In the morning, I shall rejoice in the prospect of your
coming, and in the evening dwell with delight on the happiness I have
enjoyed in your presence; then too, when alone, I can call forth mighty
pictures of the past, see vast horizons bounded only by the towering
mountains of Pindus and Olympus. Oh, believe me, that when three great
passions, such as sorrow, love, and gratitude fill the heart, _ennui_
can find no place."

"You are a worthy daughter of Epirus, Haydée, and your charming and
poetical ideas prove well your descent from that race of goddesses who
claim your country as their birthplace. Depend on my care to see that
your youth is not blighted, or suffered to pass away in ungenial
solitude; and of this be well assured, that if you love me as a father,
I love you as a child."

"You are wrong, my lord. The love I have for you is very different from
the love I had for my father. My father died, but I did not die. If you
were to die, I should die too." The Count, with a smile of profound
tenderness, extended his hand, and she carried it to her lips. Monte
Cristo, thus attuned to the interview he proposed to hold with Morrel
and his family, departed, murmuring as he went these lines of Pindar,
"Youth is a flower of which love is the fruit; happy is he who, after
having watched its silent growth, is permitted to gather and call it his
own." The carriage was prepared according to orders, and stepping
lightly into it, the count drove off at his usual rapid pace.



Chapter 50. The Morrel Family

In a very few minutes the count reached No. 7 in the Rue Meslay. The
house was of white stone, and in a small court before it were two small
beds full of beautiful flowers. In the concierge that opened the gate
the count recognized Cocles; but as he had but one eye, and that eye had
become somewhat dim in the course of nine years, Cocles did not
recognize the count. The carriages that drove up to the door were
compelled to turn, to avoid a fountain that played in a basin of
rockwork,--an ornament that had excited the jealousy of the whole
quarter, and had gained for the place the appellation of _The Little
Versailles_. It is needless to add that there were gold and silver fish
in the basin. The house, with kitchens and cellars below, had above the
ground floor, two stories and attics. The whole of the property,
consisting of an immense workshop, two pavilions at the bottom of the
garden, and the garden itself, had been purchased by Emmanuel, who had
seen at a glance that he could make of it a profitable speculation. He
had reserved the house and half the garden, and building a wall between
the garden and the workshops, had let them upon lease with the pavilions
at the bottom of the garden. So that for a trifling sum he was as well
lodged, and as perfectly shut out from observation, as the inhabitants
of the finest mansion in the Faubourg St. Germain. The breakfast-room
was finished in oak; the salon in mahogany, and the furnishings were of
blue velvet; the bedroom was in citronwood and green damask. There was a
study for Emmanuel, who never studied, and a music-room for Julie, who
never played. The whole of the second story was set apart for
Maximilian; it was precisely similar to his sister's apartments, except
that for the breakfast-parlor he had a billiard-room, where he received
his friends. He was superintending the grooming of his horse, and
smoking his cigar at the entrance of the garden, when the count's
carriage stopped at the gate.

Cocles opened the gate, and Baptistin, springing from the box, inquired
whether Monsieur and Madame Herbault and Monsieur Maximilian Morrel
would see his excellency the Count of Monte Cristo. "The Count of Monte
Cristo?" cried Morrel, throwing away his cigar and hastening to the
carriage; "I should think we would see him. Ah, a thousand thanks,
count, for not having forgotten your promise." And the young officer
shook the count's hand so warmly, that Monte Cristo could not be
