
"When he was in England he seduced the wife of one of my friends."

"Why do you not seek revenge?"

"I have already fought three duels with him," said the Englishman, "the
first with the pistol, the second with the sword, and the third with the
sabre."

"And what was the result of those duels?"

"The first time, he broke my arm; the second, he wounded me in the
breast; and the third time, made this large wound." The Englishman
turned down his shirt-collar, and showed a scar, whose redness proved it
to be a recent one. "So that, you see, there is a deadly feud between
us."

"But," said the envoy, "you do not go about it in the right way to kill
him, if I understand you correctly."

"Aw?" said the Englishman, "I practice shooting every day, and every
other day Grisier comes to my house."

This was all the visitor wished to ascertain, or, rather, all the
Englishman appeared to know. The agent arose, and having bowed to Lord
Wilmore, who returned his salutation with the stiff politeness of the
English, he retired. Lord Wilmore, having heard the door close after
him, returned to his bedroom, where with one hand he pulled off his
light hair, his red whiskers, his false jaw, and his wound, to resume
the black hair, dark complexion, and pearly teeth of the Count of Monte
Cristo. It was M. de Villefort, and not the prefect, who returned to the
house of M. de Villefort. The procureur felt more at ease, although he
had learned nothing really satisfactory, and, for the first time since
the dinner-party at Auteuil, he slept soundly.



Chapter 70. The Ball

It was in the warmest days of July, when in due course of time the
Saturday arrived upon which the ball was to take place at M. de
Morcerf's. It was ten o'clock at night; the branches of the great trees
in the garden of the count's house stood out boldly against the azure
canopy of heaven, which was studded with golden stars, but where the
last fleeting clouds of a vanishing storm yet lingered. From the
apartments on the ground floor might be heard the sound of music, with
the whirl of the waltz and galop, while brilliant streams of light shone
through the openings of the Venetian blinds. At this moment the garden
was only occupied by about ten servants, who had just received orders
from their mistress to prepare the supper, the serenity of the weather
continuing to increase. Until now, it had been undecided whether the
supper should take place in the dining-room, or under a long tent
erected on the lawn, but the beautiful blue sky, studded with stars, had
settled the question in favor of the lawn. The gardens were illuminated
with colored lanterns, according to the Italian custom, and, as is usual
in countries where the luxuries of the table--the rarest of all luxuries
in their complete form--are well understood, the supper-table was loaded
with wax-lights and flowers.


At the time the Countess of Morcerf returned to the rooms, after giving
her orders, many guests were arriving, more attracted by the charming
hospitality of the countess than by the distinguished position of the
count; for, owing to the good taste of Mercédès, one was sure of finding
some devices at her entertainment worthy of describing, or even copying
in case of need. Madame Danglars, in whom the events we have related had
caused deep anxiety, had hesitated about going to Madame de Morcerf's,
when during the morning her carriage happened to meet that of Villefort.
The latter made a sign, and when the carriages had drawn close together,
said, "You are going to Madame de Morcerf's, are you not?"

"No," replied Madame Danglars, "I am too ill."

"You are wrong," replied Villefort, significantly; "it is important that
you should be seen there."

"Do you think so?" asked the baroness.

"I do."

"In that case I will go." And the two carriages passed on towards their
different destinations. Madame Danglars therefore came, not only
beautiful in person, but radiant with splendor; she entered by one door
at the time when Mercédès appeared at the door. The countess took Albert
to meet Madame Danglars. He approached, paid her some well merited
compliments on her toilet, and offered his arm to conduct her to a seat.
Albert looked around him. "You are looking for my daughter?" said the
baroness, smiling.

"I confess it," replied Albert. "Could you have been so cruel as not to
bring her?"

"Calm yourself. She has met Mademoiselle de Villefort, and has taken her
arm; see, they are following us, both in white dresses, one with a
bouquet of camellias, the other with one of myosotis. But tell me----"

"Well, what do you wish to know?"

"Will not the Count of Monte Cristo be here tonight?"

"Seventeen!" replied Albert.

"What do you mean?"

"I only mean that the count seems the rage," replied the viscount,
smiling, "and that you are the seventeenth person that has asked me the
same question. The count is in fashion; I congratulate him upon it."

"And have you replied to everyone as you have to me?"

"Ah, to be sure, I have not answered you; be satisfied, we shall have
this 'lion'; we are among the privileged ones."

"Were you at the Opera yesterday?"

"No."

"He was there."

"Ah, indeed? And did the eccentric person commit any new originality?"

"Can he be seen without doing so? Elssler was dancing in _Le Diable
boiteux_; the Greek princess was in ecstasies. After the cachucha he
placed a magnificent ring on the stem of a bouquet, and threw it to the
charming danseuse, who, in the third act, to do honor to the gift,
reappeared with it on her finger. And the Greek princess,--will she be
here?"

"No, you will be deprived of that pleasure; her position in the count's
establishment is not sufficiently understood."

"Wait; leave me here, and go and speak to Madame de Villefort, who is
trying to attract your attention."

Albert bowed to Madame Danglars, and advanced towards Madame de
Villefort, whose lips opened as he approached. "I wager anything," said
Albert, interrupting her, "that I know what you were about to say."

"Well, what is it?"

"If I guess rightly, will you confess it?"

"Yes."

"On your honor?"

"On my honor."

"You were going to ask me if the Count of Monte Cristo had arrived, or
was expected."

"Not at all. It is not of him that I am now thinking. I was going to ask
you if you had received any news of Monsieur Franz."

"Yes,--yesterday."

"What did he tell you?"

"That he was leaving at the same time as his letter."

"Well, now then, the count?"

"The count will come, of that you may be satisfied."

"You know that he has another name besides Monte Cristo?"

"No, I did not know it."

"Monte Cristo is the name of an island, and he has a family name."

"I never heard it."

"Well, then, I am better informed than you; his name is Zaccone."

"It is possible."

"He is a Maltese."

"That is also possible.

"The son of a shipowner."

"Really, you should relate all this aloud, you would have the greatest
success."

"He served in India, discovered a mine in Thessaly, and comes to Paris
to establish a mineral water-cure at Auteuil."

"Well, I'm sure," said Morcerf, "this is indeed news! Am I allowed to
repeat it?"

"Yes, but cautiously, tell one thing at a time, and do not say I told
you."

"Why so?"

"Because it is a secret just discovered."

"By whom?"

