earnest conversation. Danglars was joking in a friendly way, but Fernand
looked pale and agitated."

"Were they alone?"

"There was a third person with them whom I knew perfectly well, and who
had, in all probability made their acquaintance; he was a tailor named
Caderousse, but he was very drunk. Stay!--stay!--How strange that it
should not have occurred to me before! Now I remember quite well, that
on the table round which they were sitting were pens, ink, and paper.
Oh, the heartless, treacherous scoundrels!" exclaimed Dantès, pressing
his hand to his throbbing brows.

"Is there anything else I can assist you in discovering, besides the
villany of your friends?" inquired the abbé with a laugh.

"Yes, yes," replied Dantès eagerly; "I would beg of you, who see so
completely to the depths of things, and to whom the greatest mystery
seems but an easy riddle, to explain to me how it was that I underwent
no second examination, was never brought to trial, and, above all, was
condemned without ever having had sentence passed on me?"

"That is altogether a different and more serious matter," responded the
abbé. "The ways of justice are frequently too dark and mysterious to be
easily penetrated. All we have hitherto done in the matter has been
child's play. If you wish me to enter upon the more difficult part of
the business, you must assist me by the most minute information on every
point."

"Pray ask me whatever questions you please; for, in good truth, you see
more clearly into my life than I do myself."

"In the first place, then, who examined you,--the king's attorney, his
deputy, or a magistrate?"

"The deputy."

"Was he young or old?"

"About six or seven and twenty years of age, I should say."

"So," answered the abbé. "Old enough to be ambitious, but too young to
be corrupt. And how did he treat you?"

"With more of mildness than severity."

"Did you tell him your whole story?"

"I did."

"And did his conduct change at all in the course of your examination?"

"He did appear much disturbed when he read the letter that had brought
me into this scrape. He seemed quite overcome by my misfortune."

"By your misfortune?"

"Yes."

"Then you feel quite sure that it was your misfortune he deplored?"

"He gave me one great proof of his sympathy, at any rate."

"And that?"

"He burnt the sole evidence that could at all have criminated me."

"What? the accusation?"

"No; the letter."

"Are you sure?"

"I saw it done."

"That alters the case. This man might, after all, be a greater scoundrel
than you have thought possible."

"Upon my word," said Dantès, "you make me shudder. Is the world filled
with tigers and crocodiles?"

"Yes; and remember that two-legged tigers and crocodiles are more
dangerous than the others."

"Never mind; let us go on."

"With all my heart! You tell me he burned the letter?"

"He did; saying at the same time, 'You see I thus destroy the only proof
existing against you.'"

"This action is somewhat too sublime to be natural."

"You think so?"

"I am sure of it. To whom was this letter addressed?"

"To M. Noirtier, No. 13 Coq-Héron, Paris."

"Now can you conceive of any interest that your heroic deputy could
possibly have had in the destruction of that letter?"

"Why, it is not altogether impossible he might have had, for he made me
promise several times never to speak of that letter to anyone, assuring
me he so advised me for my own interest; and, more than this, he
insisted on my taking a solemn oath never to utter the name mentioned in
the address."

"Noirtier!" repeated the abbé; "Noirtier!--I knew a person of that name
at the court of the Queen of Etruria,--a Noirtier, who had been a
Girondin during the Revolution! What was your deputy called?"

"De Villefort!" The abbé burst into a fit of laughter, while Dantès
gazed on him in utter astonishment.

"What ails you?" said he at length.

"Do you see that ray of sunlight?"

"I do."

"Well, the whole thing is more clear to me than that sunbeam is to you.
Poor fellow! poor young man! And you tell me this magistrate expressed
great sympathy and commiseration for you?"

"He did."

"And the worthy man destroyed your compromising letter?"

"Yes."

"And then made you swear never to utter the name of Noirtier?"

"Yes."

"Why, you poor short-sighted simpleton, can you not guess who this
Noirtier was, whose very name he was so careful to keep concealed?
Noirtier was his father."

Had a thunderbolt fallen at the feet of Dantès, or hell opened its
yawning gulf before him, he could not have been more completely
transfixed with horror than he was at the sound of these unexpected
words. Starting up, he clasped his hands around his head as though to
prevent his very brain from bursting, and exclaimed, "His father! his
father!"

"Yes, his father," replied the abbé; "his right name was Noirtier de
Villefort." At this instant a bright light shot through the mind of
Dantès, and cleared up all that had been dark and obscure before. The
change that had come over Villefort during the examination, the
destruction of the letter, the exacted promise, the almost supplicating
tones of the magistrate, who seemed rather to implore mercy than to
pronounce punishment,--all returned with a stunning force to his memory.
He cried out, and staggered against the wall like a drunken man, then he
hurried to the opening that led from the abbé's cell to his own, and
said, "I must be alone, to think over all this."

When he regained his dungeon, he threw himself on his bed, where the
turnkey found him in the evening visit, sitting with fixed gaze and
contracted features, dumb and motionless as a statue. During these hours
of profound meditation, which to him had seemed only minutes, he had
formed a fearful resolution, and bound himself to its fulfilment by a
solemn oath.

Dantès was at length roused from his reverie by the voice of Faria, who,
having also been visited by his jailer, had come to invite his fellow-
sufferer to share his supper. The reputation of being out of his mind,
though harmlessly and even amusingly so, had procured for the abbé
unusual privileges. He was supplied with bread of a finer, whiter
quality than the usual prison fare, and even regaled each Sunday with a
small quantity of wine. Now this was a Sunday, and the abbé had come to
ask his young companion to share the luxuries with him. Dantès followed;
his features were no longer contracted, and now wore their usual
expression, but there was that in his whole appearance that bespoke one
who had come to a fixed and desperate resolve. Faria bent on him his
penetrating eye: "I regret now," said he, "having helped you in your
late inquiries, or having given you the information I did."

"Why so?" inquired Dantès.

"Because it has instilled a new passion in your heart--that of
vengeance."

Dantès smiled. "Let us talk of something else," said he.

Again the abbé looked at him, then mournfully shook his head; but in
accordance with Dantès' request, he began to speak of other matters. The
elder prisoner was one of those persons whose conversation, like that of
all who have experienced many trials, contained many useful and
important hints as well as sound information; but it was never
egotistical, for the unfortunate man never alluded to his own sorrows.
Dantès listened with admiring attention to all he said; some of his
remarks corresponded with what he already knew, or applied to the sort
of knowledge his nautical life had enabled him to acquire. A part of the
good abbé's words, however, were wholly incomprehensible to him; but,
like the aurora which guides the navigator in northern latitudes, opened
new vistas to the inquiring mind of the listener, and gave fantastic
glimpses of new horizons, enabling him justly to estimate the delight an
intellectual mind would have in following one so richly gifted as Faria
along the heights of truth, where he was so much at home.
