deadly poison poured into your glass, and how I trembled lest you should
drink it before I could find time to throw it away!"

"Sir," said Valentine, at the height of her terror, "you say you endured
tortures when you saw the deadly poison poured into my glass; but if you
saw this, you must also have seen the person who poured it?"

"Yes." Valentine raised herself in bed, and drew over her chest, which
appeared whiter than snow, the embroidered cambric, still moist with the
cold dews of delirium, to which were now added those of terror. "You saw
the person?" repeated the young girl. "Yes," repeated the count.

"What you tell me is horrible, sir. You wish to make me believe
something too dreadful. What?--attempt to murder me in my father's
house, in my room, on my bed of sickness? Oh, leave me, sir; you are
tempting me--you make me doubt the goodness of Providence--it is
impossible, it cannot be!"

"Are you the first that this hand has stricken? Have you not seen M. de
Saint-Méran, Madame de Saint-Méran, Barrois, all fall? Would not M.
Noirtier also have fallen a victim, had not the treatment he has been
pursuing for the last three years neutralized the effects of the
poison?"

"Oh, heaven," said Valentine; "is this the reason why grandpapa has made
me share all his beverages during the last month?"

"And have they all tasted of a slightly bitter flavor, like that of
dried orange-peel?"

"Oh, yes, yes!"

"Then that explains all," said Monte Cristo. "Your grandfather knows,
then, that a poisoner lives here; perhaps he even suspects the person.
He has been fortifying you, his beloved child, against the fatal effects
of the poison, which has failed because your system was already
impregnated with it. But even this would have availed little against a
more deadly medium of death employed four days ago, which is generally
but too fatal."

"But who, then, is this assassin, this murderer?"

"Let me also ask you a question. Have you never seen anyone enter your
room at night?"

"Oh, yes; I have frequently seen shadows pass close to me, approach, and
disappear; but I took them for visions raised by my feverish
imagination, and indeed when you entered I thought I was under the
influence of delirium."

"Then you do not know who it is that attempts your life?"


"No," said Valentine; "who could desire my death?"

"You shall know it now, then," said Monte Cristo, listening.

"How do you mean?" said Valentine, looking anxiously around.

"Because you are not feverish or delirious tonight, but thoroughly
awake; midnight is striking, which is the hour murderers choose."

"Oh, heavens," exclaimed Valentine, wiping off the drops which ran down
her forehead. Midnight struck slowly and sadly; every hour seemed to
strike with leaden weight upon the heart of the poor girl. "Valentine,"
said the count, "summon up all your courage; still the beatings of your
heart; do not let a sound escape you, and feign to be asleep; then you
will see." Valentine seized the count's hand. "I think I hear a noise,"
she said; "leave me."

"Good-bye, for the present," replied the count, walking upon tiptoe
towards the library door, and smiling with an expression so sad and
paternal that the young girl's heart was filled with gratitude. Before
closing the door he turned around once more, and said, "Not a movement--
not a word; let them think you asleep, or perhaps you may be killed
before I have the power of helping you." And with this fearful
injunction the count disappeared through the door, which noiselessly
closed after him.



Chapter 101. Locusta

Valentine was alone; two other clocks, slower than that of Saint-
Philippe du Roule, struck the hour of midnight from different
directions, and excepting the rumbling of a few carriages all was
silent. Then Valentine's attention was engrossed by the clock in her
room, which marked the seconds. She began counting them, remarking that
they were much slower than the beatings of her heart; and still she
doubted,--the inoffensive Valentine could not imagine that anyone should
desire her death. Why should they? To what end? What had she done to
excite the malice of an enemy?

There was no fear of her falling asleep. One terrible idea pressed upon
her mind,--that someone existed in the world who had attempted to
assassinate her, and who was about to endeavor to do so again. Supposing
this person, wearied at the inefficacy of the poison, should, as Monte
Cristo intimated, have recourse to steel!--What if the count should have
no time to run to her rescue!--What if her last moments were
approaching, and she should never again see Morrel!

When this terrible chain of ideas presented itself, Valentine was nearly
persuaded to ring the bell, and call for help. But through the door she
fancied she saw the luminous eye of the count--that eye which lived in
her memory, and the recollection overwhelmed her with so much shame that
she asked herself whether any amount of gratitude could ever repay his
adventurous and devoted friendship.

Twenty minutes, twenty tedious minutes, passed thus, then ten more, and
at last the clock struck the half-hour. Just then the sound of finger-
nails slightly grating against the door of the library informed
Valentine that the count was still watching, and recommended her to do
the same; at the same time, on the opposite side, that is towards
Edward's room, Valentine fancied that she heard the creaking of the
floor; she listened attentively, holding her breath till she was nearly
suffocated; the lock turned, and the door slowly opened. Valentine had
raised herself upon her elbow, and had scarcely time to throw herself
down on the bed and shade her eyes with her arm; then, trembling,
agitated, and her heart beating with indescribable terror, she awaited
the event.

Someone approached the bed and drew back the curtains. Valentine
summoned every effort, and breathed with that regular respiration which
announces tranquil sleep. "Valentine!" said a low voice. Still silent:
Valentine had promised not to awake. Then everything was still,
excepting that Valentine heard the almost noiseless sound of some liquid
being poured into the glass she had just emptied. Then she ventured to
open her eyelids, and glance over her extended arm. She saw a woman in a
white dressing-gown pouring a liquor from a phial into her glass. During
this short time Valentine must have held her breath, or moved in some
slight degree, for the woman, disturbed, stopped and leaned over the
bed, in order the better to ascertain whether Valentine slept--it was
Madame de Villefort.

On recognizing her step-mother, Valentine could not repress a shudder,
which caused a vibration in the bed. Madame de Villefort instantly
stepped back close to the wall, and there, shaded by the bed-curtains,
she silently and attentively watched the slightest movement of
Valentine. The latter recollected the terrible caution of Monte Cristo;
she fancied that the hand not holding the phial clasped a long sharp
knife. Then collecting all her remaining strength, she forced herself to
close her eyes; but this simple operation upon the most delicate organs
of our frame, generally so easy to accomplish, became almost impossible
at this moment, so much did curiosity struggle to retain the eyelid open
and learn the truth. Madame de Villefort, however, reassured by the
silence, which was alone disturbed by the regular breathing of
Valentine, again extended her hand, and half hidden by the curtains
succeeded in emptying the contents of the phial into the glass. Then she
retired so gently that Valentine did not know she had left the room. She
only witnessed the withdrawal of the arm--the fair round arm of a woman
but twenty-five years old, and who yet spread death around her.


It is impossible to describe the sensations experienced by Valentine
during the minute and a half Madame de Villefort remained in the room.
The grating against the library-door aroused the young girl from the
stupor in which she was plunged, and which almost amounted to
insensibility. She raised her head with an effort. The noiseless door
again turned on its hinges, and the Count of Monte Cristo reappeared.
"Well," said he, "do you still doubt?"

"Oh," murmured the young girl.

"Have you seen?"

"Alas!"

"Did you recognize?" Valentine groaned. "Oh, yes;" she said, "I saw, but
I cannot believe!"

"Would you rather die, then, and cause Maximilian's death?"

"Oh," repeated the young girl, almost bewildered, "can I not leave the
house?--can I not escape?"

"Valentine, the hand which now threatens you will pursue you everywhere;
your servants will be seduced with gold, and death will be offered to
you disguised in every shape. You will find it in the water you drink
from the spring, in the fruit you pluck from the tree."

"But did you not say that my kind grandfather's precaution had
neutralized the poison?"

"Yes, but not against a strong dose; the poison will be changed, and the
quantity increased." He took the glass and raised it to his lips. "It is
already done," he said; "brucine is no longer employed, but a simple
narcotic! I can recognize the flavor of the alcohol in which it has been
dissolved. If you had taken what Madame de Villefort has poured into
your glass, Valentine--Valentine--you would have been doomed!"

"But," exclaimed the young girl, "why am I thus pursued?"

"Why?--are you so kind--so good--so unsuspicious of ill, that you cannot
understand, Valentine?"

"No, I have never injured her."

"But you are rich, Valentine; you have 200,000 livres a year, and you
prevent her son from enjoying these 200,000 livres."

