
"I warn you, Master Caderousse, that you are mistaken."

"Well, well, don't be angry, my boy; you know well enough what it is to
be unfortunate; and misfortunes make us jealous. I thought you were
earning a living in Tuscany or Piedmont by acting as _facchino_ or
_cicerone_, and I pitied you sincerely, as I would a child of my own.
You know I always did call you my child."

"Come, come, what then?"

"Patience--patience!"

"I am patient, but go on."

"All at once I see you pass through the barrier with a groom, a tilbury,
and fine new clothes. You must have discovered a mine, or else become a
stockbroker."

"So that, as you confess, you are jealous?"

"No, I am pleased--so pleased that I wished to congratulate you; but as
I am not quite properly dressed, I chose my opportunity, that I might
not compromise you."

"Yes, and a fine opportunity you have chosen!" exclaimed Andrea; "you
speak to me before my servant."

"How can I help that, my boy? I speak to you when I can catch you. You
have a quick horse, a light tilbury, you are naturally as slippery as an
eel; if I had missed you tonight, I might not have had another chance."

"You see, I do not conceal myself."

"You are lucky; I wish I could say as much, for I do conceal myself; and
then I was afraid you would not recognize me, but you did," added
Caderousse with his unpleasant smile. "It was very polite of you."

"Come," said Andrea, "what do you want?"

"You do not speak affectionately to me, Benedetto, my old friend, that
is not right--take care, or I may become troublesome." This menace
smothered the young man's passion. He urged the horse again into a trot.
"You should not speak so to an old friend like me, Caderousse, as you
said just now; you are a native of Marseilles, I am----"

"Do you know then now what you are?"

"No, but I was brought up in Corsica; you are old and obstinate, I am
young and wilful. Between people like us threats are out of place,
everything should be amicably arranged. Is it my fault if fortune, which
has frowned on you, has been kind to me?"

"Fortune has been kind to you, then? Your tilbury, your groom, your
clothes, are not then hired? Good, so much the better," said Caderousse,
his eyes sparkling with avarice.

"Oh, you knew that well enough before speaking to me," said Andrea,
becoming more and more excited. "If I had been wearing a handkerchief
like yours on my head, rags on my back, and worn-out shoes on my feet,
you would not have known me."

"You wrong me, my boy; now I have found you, nothing prevents my being
as well-dressed as anyone, knowing, as I do, the goodness of your heart.
If you have two coats you will give me one of them. I used to divide my
soup and beans with you when you were hungry."

"True," said Andrea.

"What an appetite you used to have! Is it as good now?"

"Oh, yes," replied Andrea, laughing.

"How did you come to be dining with that prince whose house you have
just left?"

"He is not a prince; simply a count."

"A count, and a rich one too, eh?"

"Yes; but you had better not have anything to say to him, for he is not
a very good-tempered gentleman."

"Oh, be easy! I have no design upon your count, and you shall have him
all to yourself. But," said Caderousse, again smiling with the
disagreeable expression he had before assumed, "you must pay for it--you
understand?"

"Well, what do you want?"

"I think that with a hundred francs a month----"

"Well?"

"I could live----"

"Upon a hundred francs!"

"Come--you understand me; but that with----"

"With?"

"With a hundred and fifty francs I should be quite happy."

"Here are two hundred," said Andrea; and he placed ten gold louis in the
hand of Caderousse.

"Good!" said Caderousse.


"Apply to the steward on the first day of every month, and you will
receive the same sum."

"There now, again you degrade me."

"How so?"

"By making me apply to the servants, when I want to transact business
with you alone."

"Well, be it so, then. Take it from me then, and so long at least as I
receive my income, you shall be paid yours."

"Come, come; I always said you were a fine fellow, and it is a blessing
when good fortune happens to such as you. But tell me all about it?"

"Why do you wish to know?" asked Cavalcanti.

"What? do you again defy me?"

"No; the fact is, I have found my father."

"What? a real father?"

"Yes, so long as he pays me----"

"You'll honor and believe him--that's right. What is his name?"

"Major Cavalcanti."

"Is he pleased with you?"

"So far I have appeared to answer his purpose."

"And who found this father for you?"

"The Count of Monte Cristo."

"The man whose house you have just left?"

"Yes."

"I wish you would try and find me a situation with him as grandfather,
since he holds the money-chest!"

"Well, I will mention you to him. Meanwhile, what are you going to do?"

"I?"

"Yes, you."

"It is very kind of you to trouble yourself about me."

"Since you interest yourself in my affairs, I think it is now my turn to
ask you some questions."

"Ah, true. Well; I shall rent a room in some respectable house, wear a
decent coat, shave every day, and go and read the papers in a café.
Then, in the evening, I shall go to the theatre; I shall look like some
retired baker. That is what I want."

"Come, if you will only put this scheme into execution, and be steady,
nothing could be better."

"Do you think so, M. Bossuet? And you--what will you become? A peer of
France?"

"Ah," said Andrea, "who knows?"

"Major Cavalcanti is already one, perhaps; but then, hereditary rank is
abolished."

"No politics, Caderousse. And now that you have all you want, and that
we understand each other, jump down from the tilbury and disappear."

"Not at all, my good friend."

"How? Not at all?"

"Why, just think for a moment; with this red handkerchief on my head,
with scarcely any shoes, no papers, and ten gold napoleons in my pocket,
without reckoning what was there before--making in all about two hundred
francs,--why, I should certainly be arrested at the barriers. Then, to
justify myself, I should say that you gave me the money; this would
cause inquiries, it would be found that I left Toulon without giving due
notice, and I should then be escorted back to the shores of the
Mediterranean. Then I should become simply No. 106, and good-bye to my
dream of resembling the retired baker! No, no, my boy; I prefer
remaining honorably in the capital." Andrea scowled. Certainly, as he
had himself owned, the reputed son of Major Cavalcanti was a wilful
