"But you?"

"Oh, I am never cold, you know! Besides, with these men's clothes----"

"Will you dress here?"

"Certainly."

"Shall you have time?"

"Do not be uneasy, you little coward! All our servants are busy,
discussing the grand affair. Besides, what is there astonishing, when
you think of the grief I ought to be in, that I shut myself up?--tell
me!"

"No, truly--you comfort me."

"Come and help me."

From the same drawer she took a man's complete costume, from the boots
to the coat, and a provision of linen, where there was nothing
superfluous, but every requisite. Then, with a promptitude which
indicated that this was not the first time she had amused herself by
adopting the garb of the opposite sex, Eugénie drew on the boots and
pantaloons, tied her cravat, buttoned her waistcoat up to the throat,
and put on a coat which admirably fitted her beautiful figure. "Oh, that
is very good--indeed, it is very good!" said Louise, looking at her with
admiration; "but that beautiful black hair, those magnificent braids,
which made all the ladies sigh with envy,--will they go under a man's
hat like the one I see down there?"

"You shall see," said Eugénie. And with her left hand seizing the thick
mass, which her long fingers could scarcely grasp, she took in her right
hand a pair of long scissors, and soon the steel met through the rich
and splendid hair, which fell in a cluster at her feet as she leaned
back to keep it from her coat. Then she grasped the front hair, which
she also cut off, without expressing the least regret; on the contrary,
her eyes sparkled with greater pleasure than usual under her ebony
eyebrows.

"Oh, the magnificent hair!" said Louise, with regret.

"And am I not a hundred times better thus?" cried Eugénie, smoothing the
scattered curls of her hair, which had now quite a masculine appearance;
"and do you not think me handsomer so?"

"Oh, you are beautiful--always beautiful!" cried Louise. "Now, where are
you going?"

"To Brussels, if you like; it is the nearest frontier. We can go to
Brussels, Liège, Aix-la-Chapelle; then up the Rhine to Strasbourg. We
will cross Switzerland, and go down into Italy by the Saint-Gothard.
Will that do?"

"Yes."

"What are you looking at?"

"I am looking at you; indeed you are adorable like that! One would say
you were carrying me off."

"And they would be right, _pardieu!_"

"Oh, I think you swore, Eugénie." And the two young girls, whom everyone
might have thought plunged in grief, the one on her own account, the
other from interest in her friend, burst out laughing, as they cleared
away every visible trace of the disorder which had naturally accompanied
the preparations for their escape. Then, having blown out the lights,
the two fugitives, looking and listening eagerly, with outstretched
necks, opened the door of a dressing-room which led by a side staircase
down to the yard,--Eugénie going first, and holding with one arm the
portmanteau, which by the opposite handle Mademoiselle d'Armilly
scarcely raised with both hands. The yard was empty; the clock was
striking twelve. The porter was not yet gone to bed. Eugénie approached
softly, and saw the old man sleeping soundly in an armchair in his
lodge. She returned to Louise, took up the portmanteau, which she had
placed for a moment on the ground, and they reached the archway under
the shadow of the wall.

Eugénie concealed Louise in an angle of the gateway, so that if the
porter chanced to awake he might see but one person. Then placing
herself in the full light of the lamp which lit the yard,--"Gate!" cried
she, with her finest contralto voice, and rapping at the window.

The porter got up as Eugénie expected, and even advanced some steps to
recognize the person who was going out, but seeing a young man striking
his boot impatiently with his riding-whip, he opened it immediately.
Louise slid through the half-open gate like a snake, and bounded lightly
forward. Eugénie, apparently calm, although in all probability her heart
beat somewhat faster than usual, went out in her turn. A porter was
passing and they gave him the portmanteau; then the two young girls,
having told him to take it to No. 36, Rue de la Victoire, walked behind
this man, whose presence comforted Louise. As for Eugénie, she was as
strong as a Judith or a Delilah. They arrived at the appointed spot.
Eugénie ordered the porter to put down the portmanteau, gave him some
pieces of money, and having rapped at the shutter sent him away. The
shutter where Eugénie had rapped was that of a little laundress, who had
been previously warned, and was not yet gone to bed. She opened the
door.

"Mademoiselle," said Eugénie, "let the porter get the post-chaise from
the coach-house, and fetch some post-horses from the hotel. Here are
five francs for his trouble."

"Indeed," said Louise, "I admire you, and I could almost say respect
you." The laundress looked on in astonishment, but as she had been
promised twenty louis, she made no remark.

In a quarter of an hour the porter returned with a post-boy and horses,
which were harnessed, and put in the post-chaise in a minute, while the
porter fastened the portmanteau on with the assistance of a cord and
strap. "Here is the passport," said the postilion, "which way are we
going, young gentleman?"

"To Fontainebleau," replied Eugénie with an almost masculine voice.

"What do you say?" said Louise.

"I am giving them the slip," said Eugénie; "this woman to whom we have
given twenty louis may betray us for forty; we will soon alter our
direction." And the young girl jumped into the britzka, which was
admirably arranged for sleeping in, without scarcely touching the step.
"You are always right," said the music teacher, seating herself by the
side of her friend.

A quarter of an hour afterwards the postilion, having been put in the
right road, passed with a crack of his whip through the gateway of the
Barrière Saint-Martin.

"Ah," said Louise, breathing freely, "here we are out of Paris."

"Yes, my dear, the abduction is an accomplished fact," replied Eugénie.

"Yes, and without violence," said Louise.

"I shall bring that forward as an extenuating circumstance," replied
Eugénie. These words were lost in the noise which the carriage made in
rolling over the pavement of La Villette. M. Danglars no longer had a
daughter.



Chapter 98. The Bell and Bottle Tavern

And now let us leave Mademoiselle Danglars and her friend pursuing their
way to Brussels, and return to poor Andrea Cavalcanti, so inopportunely
interrupted in his rise to fortune. Notwithstanding his youth, Master
Andrea was a very skilful and intelligent boy. We have seen that on the
first rumor which reached the salon he had gradually approached the
door, and crossing two or three rooms at last disappeared. But we have
forgotten to mention one circumstance, which nevertheless ought not to
be omitted; in one of the rooms he crossed, the trousseau of the bride-
elect was on exhibition. There were caskets of diamonds, cashmere
shawls, Valenciennes lace, English veilings, and in fact all the
tempting things, the bare mention of which makes the hearts of young
girls bound with joy, and which is called the _corbeille_. [*] Now, in
passing through this room, Andrea proved himself not only to be clever
and intelligent, but also provident, for he helped himself to the most
valuable of the ornaments before him.


* Literally, "the basket," because wedding gifts were originally brought
in such a receptacle.

Furnished with this plunder, Andrea leaped with a lighter heart from the
window, intending to slip through the hands of the gendarmes. Tall and
well proportioned as an ancient gladiator, and muscular as a Spartan, he
walked for a quarter of an hour without knowing where to direct his
steps, actuated by the sole idea of getting away from the spot where if
he lingered he knew that he would surely be taken. Having passed through
the Rue Mont Blanc, guided by the instinct which leads thieves always to
take the safest path, he found himself at the end of the Rue Lafayette.
There he stopped, breathless and panting. He was quite alone; on one
side was the vast wilderness of the Saint-Lazare, on the other, Paris
enshrouded in darkness. "Am I to be captured?" he cried; "no, not if I
can use more activity than my enemies. My safety is now a mere question
of speed." At this moment he saw a cab at the top of the Faubourg
Poissonnière. The dull driver, smoking his pipe, was plodding along
toward the limits of the Faubourg Saint-Denis, where no doubt he
ordinarily had his station. "Ho, friend!" said Benedetto.

"What do you want, sir?" asked the driver.

"Is your horse tired?"

"Tired? oh, yes, tired enough--he has done nothing the whole of this
blessed day! Four wretched fares, and twenty sous over, making in all
seven francs, are all that I have earned, and I ought to take ten to the
owner."

"Will you add these twenty francs to the seven you have?"

"With pleasure, sir; twenty francs are not to be despised. Tell me what
I am to do for this."

"A very easy thing, if your horse isn't tired."

"I tell you he'll go like the wind,--only tell me which way to drive."

"Towards the Louvres."
