boy's account, that they took to avoid being seen. In an instant we were
on the alert, but it was too late; our vessel was surrounded, and
amongst the custom-house officers I observed several gendarmes, and, as
terrified at the sight of their uniforms as I was brave at the sight of
any other, I sprang into the hold, opened a port, and dropped into the
river, dived, and only rose at intervals to breathe, until I reached a
ditch that had recently been made from the Rhône to the canal that runs
from Beaucaire to Aigues-Mortes. I was now safe, for I could swim along
the ditch without being seen, and I reached the canal in safety. I had
designedly taken this direction. I have already told your excellency of
an innkeeper from Nîmes who had set up a little tavern on the road from
Bellegarde to Beaucaire."

"Yes," said Monte Cristo "I perfectly recollect him; I think he was your
colleague."

"Precisely," answered Bertuccio; "but he had, seven or eight years
before this period, sold his establishment to a tailor at Marseilles,
who, having almost ruined himself in his old trade, wished to make his
fortune in another. Of course, we made the same arrangements with the
new landlord that we had with the old; and it was of this man that I
intended to ask shelter."

"What was his name?" inquired the count, who seemed to become somewhat
interested in Bertuccio's story.

"Gaspard Caderousse; he had married a woman from the village of
Carconte, and whom we did not know by any other name than that of her
village. She was suffering from malarial fever, and seemed dying by
inches. As for her husband, he was a strapping fellow of forty, or five
and forty, who had more than once, in time of danger, given ample proof
of his presence of mind and courage."

"And you say," interrupted Monte Cristo "that this took place towards
the year----"

"1829, your excellency."

"In what month?"

"June."

"The beginning or the end?"

"The evening of the 3d."


"Ah," said Monte Cristo "the evening of the 3d of June, 1829. Go on."

"It was from Caderousse that I intended demanding shelter, and, as we
never entered by the door that opened onto the road, I resolved not to
break through the rule, so climbing over the garden-hedge, I crept
amongst the olive and wild fig trees, and fearing that Caderousse might
have some guest, I entered a kind of shed in which I had often passed
the night, and which was only separated from the inn by a partition, in
which holes had been made in order to enable us to watch an opportunity
of announcing our presence. My intention was, if Caderousse was alone,
to acquaint him with my presence, finish the meal the custom-house
officers had interrupted, and profit by the threatened storm to return
to the Rhône, and ascertain the state of our vessel and its crew. I
stepped into the shed, and it was fortunate I did so, for at that moment
Caderousse entered with a stranger.

"I waited patiently, not to overhear what they said, but because I could
do nothing else; besides, the same thing had occurred often before. The
man who was with Caderousse was evidently a stranger to the South of
France; he was one of those merchants who come to sell jewellery at the
Beaucaire fair, and who during the month the fair lasts, and during
which there is so great an influx of merchants and customers from all
parts of Europe, often have dealings to the amount of 100,000 to 150,000
francs. Caderousse entered hastily. Then, seeing that the room was, as
usual, empty, and only guarded by the dog, he called to his wife,
'Hello, Carconte,' said he, 'the worthy priest has not deceived us; the
diamond is real.' An exclamation of joy was heard, and the staircase
creaked beneath a feeble step. 'What do you say?' asked his wife, pale
as death.

"'I say that the diamond is real, and that this gentleman, one of the
first jewellers of Paris, will give us 50,000 francs for it. Only, in
order to satisfy himself that it really belongs to us, he wishes you to
relate to him, as I have done already, the miraculous manner in which
the diamond came into our possession. In the meantime please to sit
down, monsieur, and I will fetch you some refreshment.' The jeweller
examined attentively the interior of the inn and the apparent poverty of
the persons who were about to sell him a diamond that seemed to have
come from the casket of a prince. 'Relate your story, madame,' said he,
wishing, no doubt, to profit by the absence of the husband, so that the
latter could not influence the wife's story, to see if the two recitals
tallied.

"'Oh,' returned she, 'it was a gift of heaven. My husband was a great
friend, in 1814 or 1815, of a sailor named Edmond Dantès. This poor
fellow, whom Caderousse had forgotten, had not forgotten him, and at his
death he bequeathed this diamond to him.'--'But how did he obtain it?'
asked the jeweller; 'had he it before he was imprisoned?'--'No,
monsieur; but it appears that in prison he made the acquaintance of a
rich Englishman, and as in prison he fell sick, and Dantès took the same
care of him as if he had been his brother, the Englishman, when he was
set free, gave this stone to Dantès, who, less fortunate, died, and, in
his turn, left it to us, and charged the excellent abbé, who was here
this morning, to deliver it.'--'The same story,' muttered the jeweller;
'and improbable as it seemed at first, it may be true. There's only the
price we are not agreed about.'--'How not agreed about?' said
Caderousse. 'I thought we agreed for the price I asked.'--'That is,'
replied the jeweller, 'I offered 40,000 francs.'--'Forty thousand,'
cried La Carconte; 'we will not part with it for that sum. The abbé told
us it was worth 50,000. without the setting.'

"'What was the abbé's name?' asked the indefatigable questioner.--'The
Abbé Busoni,' said La Carconte.--'He was a foreigner?'--'An Italian,
from the neighborhood of Mantua, I believe.'--'Let me see this diamond
again,' replied the jeweller; 'the first time you are often mistaken as
to the value of a stone.' Caderousse took from his pocket a small case
of black shagreen, opened, and gave it to the jeweller. At the sight of
the diamond, which was as large as a hazel-nut, La Carconte's eyes
sparkled with cupidity."

"And what did you think of this fine story, eavesdropper?" said Monte
Cristo; "did you credit it?"

"Yes, your excellency. I did not look on Caderousse as a bad man, and I
thought him incapable of committing a crime, or even a theft."

"That did more honor to your heart than to your experience, M.
Bertuccio. Had you known this Edmond Dantès, of whom they spoke?"

"No, your excellency, I had never heard of him before, and never but
once afterwards, and that was from the Abbé Busoni himself, when I saw
him in the prison at Nîmes."

"Go on."

"The jeweller took the ring, and drawing from his pocket a pair of steel
pliers and a small set of copper scales, he took the stone out of its
setting, and weighed it carefully. 'I will give you 45,000,' said he,
'but not a sou more; besides, as that is the exact value of the stone, I
brought just that sum with me.'--'Oh, that's no matter,' replied
Caderousse, 'I will go back with you to fetch the other 5,000 francs.'--
'No,' returned the jeweller, giving back the diamond and the ring to
Caderousse--'no, it is worth no more, and I am sorry I offered so much,
for the stone has a flaw in it, which I had not seen. However, I will
not go back on my word, and I will give 45,000.'--'At least, replace the
diamond in the ring,' said La Carconte sharply.--'Ah, true,' replied the
jeweller, and he reset the stone.--'No matter,' observed Caderousse,
replacing the box in his pocket, 'someone else will purchase it.'--
'Yes,' continued the jeweller; 'but someone else will not be so easy as
I am, or content himself with the same story. It is not natural that a
man like you should possess such a diamond. He will inform against you.
You will have to find the Abbé Busoni; and abbés who give diamonds worth
two thousand louis are rare. The law would seize it, and put you in
prison; if at the end of three or four months you are set at liberty,
the ring will be lost, or a false stone, worth three francs, will be
given you, instead of a diamond worth 50,000 or perhaps 55,000 francs;
from which you must allow that one runs considerable risk in
purchasing.' Caderousse and his wife looked eagerly at each other.--
'No,' said Caderousse, 'we are not rich enough to lose 5,000 francs.'--
'As you please, my dear sir,' said the jeweller; 'I had, however, as you
see, brought you the money in bright coin.' And he drew from his pocket
a handful of gold, and held it sparkling before the dazzled eyes of the
innkeeper, and in the other hand he held a packet of bank-notes.

"There was evidently a severe struggle in the mind of Caderousse; it was
plain that the small shagreen case, which he turned over and over in his
hand, did not seem to him commensurate in value to the enormous sum
which fascinated his gaze. He turned towards his wife. 'What do you
think of this?' he asked in a low voice.--'Let him have it--let him have
it,' she said. 'If he returns to Beaucaire without the diamond, he will
inform against us, and, as he says, who knows if we shall ever again see
the Abbé Busoni?--in all probability we shall never see him.'--'Well,
then, so I will!' said Caderousse; 'so you may have the diamond for
45,000 francs. But my wife wants a gold chain, and I want a pair of
silver buckles.' The jeweller drew from his pocket a long flat box,
which contained several samples of the articles demanded. 'Here,' he
said, 'I am very straightforward in my dealings--take your choice.' The
woman selected a gold chain worth about five louis, and the husband a
pair of buckles, worth perhaps fifteen francs.--'I hope you will not
complain now?' said the jeweller.

"'The abbé told me it was worth 50,000 francs,' muttered Caderousse.
'Come, come--give it to me! What a strange fellow you are,' said the
jeweller, taking the diamond from his hand. 'I give you 45,000 francs--
that is, 2,500 livres of income,--a fortune such as I wish I had myself,
and you are not satisfied!'--'And the five and forty thousand francs,'
inquired Caderousse in a hoarse voice, 'where are they? Come--let us see
them.'--'Here they are,' replied the jeweller, and he counted out upon
the table 15,000 francs in gold, and 30,000 francs in bank-notes.

"'Wait while I light the lamp,' said La Carconte; 'it is growing dark,
and there may be some mistake.' In fact, night had come on during this
conversation, and with night the storm which had been threatening for
the last half-hour. The thunder growled in the distance; but it was
apparently not heard by the jeweller, Caderousse, or La Carconte,
absorbed as they were all three with the demon of gain. I myself felt; a
strange kind of fascination at the sight of all this gold and all these
bank-notes; it seemed to me that I was in a dream, and, as it always
happens in a dream, I felt myself riveted to the spot. Caderousse
counted and again counted the gold and the notes, then handed them to
his wife, who counted and counted them again in her turn. During this
time, the jeweller made the diamond play and sparkle in the lamplight,
and the gem threw out jets of light which made him unmindful of those
