longer able to recognize a woman when she appears in a plain and simple
attire; nor indeed, had she fallen into that state of depression where
it is impossible to conceal the garb of misery; no, the change in
Mercédès was that her eye no longer sparkled, her lips no longer smiled,
and there was now a hesitation in uttering the words which formerly
sprang so fluently from her ready wit.

It was not poverty which had broken her spirit; it was not a want of
courage which rendered her poverty burdensome. Mercédès, although
deposed from the exalted position she had occupied, lost in the sphere
she had now chosen, like a person passing from a room splendidly lighted
into utter darkness, appeared like a queen, fallen from her palace to a
hovel, and who, reduced to strict necessity, could neither become
reconciled to the earthen vessels she was herself forced to place upon
the table, nor to the humble pallet which had become her bed. The
beautiful Catalane and noble countess had lost both her proud glance and
charming smile, because she saw nothing but misery around her; the walls
were hung with one of the gray papers which economical landlords choose
as not likely to show the dirt; the floor was uncarpeted; the furniture
attracted the attention to the poor attempt at luxury; indeed,
everything offended eyes accustomed to refinement and elegance.

Madame de Morcerf had lived there since leaving her house; the continual
silence of the spot oppressed her; still, seeing that Albert continually
watched her countenance to judge the state of her feelings, she
constrained herself to assume a monotonous smile of the lips alone,
which, contrasted with the sweet and beaming expression that usually
shone from her eyes, seemed like "moonlight on a statue,"--yielding
light without warmth. Albert, too, was ill at ease; the remains of
luxury prevented him from sinking into his actual position. If he wished
to go out without gloves, his hands appeared too white; if he wished to
walk through the town, his boots seemed too highly polished. Yet these
two noble and intelligent creatures, united by the indissoluble ties of
maternal and filial love, had succeeded in tacitly understanding one
another, and economizing their stores, and Albert had been able to tell
his mother without extorting a change of countenance,--"Mother, we have
no more money."


Mercédès had never known misery; she had often, in her youth, spoken of
poverty, but between want and necessity, those synonymous words, there
is a wide difference. Amongst the Catalans, Mercédès wished for a
thousand things, but still she never really wanted any. So long as the
nets were good, they caught fish; and so long as they sold their fish,
they were able to buy twine for new nets. And then, shut out from
friendship, having but one affection, which could not be mixed up with
her ordinary pursuits, she thought of herself--of no one but herself.
Upon the little she earned she lived as well as she could; now there
were two to be supported, and nothing to live upon.

Winter approached. Mercédès had no fire in that cold and naked room--
she, who was accustomed to stoves which heated the house from the hall
to the boudoir; she had not even one little flower--she whose apartment
had been a conservatory of costly exotics. But she had her son. Hitherto
the excitement of fulfilling a duty had sustained them. Excitement, like
enthusiasm, sometimes renders us unconscious to the things of earth. But
the excitement had calmed down, and they felt themselves obliged to
descend from dreams to reality; after having exhausted the ideal, they
found they must talk of the actual.

"Mother," exclaimed Albert, just as Madame Danglars was descending the
stairs, "let us reckon our riches, if you please; I want capital to
build my plans upon."

"Capital--nothing!" replied Mercédès with a mournful smile.

"No, mother,--capital 3,000 francs. And I have an idea of our leading a
delightful life upon this 3,000 francs."

"Child!" sighed Mercédès.

"Alas, dear mother," said the young man, "I have unhappily spent too
much of your money not to know the value of it. These 3,000 francs are
enormous, and I intend building upon this foundation a miraculous
certainty for the future."

"You say this, my dear boy; but do you think we ought to accept these
3,000 francs?" said Mercédès, coloring.

"I think so," answered Albert in a firm tone. "We will accept them the
more readily, since we have them not here; you know they are buried in
the garden of the little house in the Allées de Meillan, at Marseilles.
With 200 francs we can reach Marseilles."

"With 200 francs?--are you sure, Albert?"

"Oh, as for that, I have made inquiries respecting the diligences and
steamboats, and my calculations are made. You will take your place in
the _coupé_ to Châlons. You see, mother, I treat you handsomely for
thirty-five francs." Albert then took a pen, and wrote:--


Frs. _Coupé_, thirty-five francs.............................. 35. From
Châlons to Lyons you will go on by the steamboat..  6. From Lyons to
Avignon (still by steamboat)............. 16. From Avignon to
Marseilles, seven francs...............  7. Expenses on the road, about
fifty francs............... 50.
Total................................................. 114 frs.

"Let us put down 120," added Albert, smiling. "You see I am generous, am
I not, mother?"

"But you, my poor child?"

"I? do you not see that I reserve eighty francs for myself? A young man
does not require luxuries; besides, I know what travelling is."

"With a post-chaise and valet de chambre?"

"Any way, mother."

"Well, be it so. But these 200 francs?"

"Here they are, and 200 more besides. See, I have sold my watch for 100
francs, and the guard and seals for 300. How fortunate that the
ornaments were worth more than the watch. Still the same story of
superfluities! Now I think we are rich, since instead of the 114 francs
we require for the journey we find ourselves in possession of 250."

"But we owe something in this house?"

"Thirty francs; but I pay that out of my 150 francs,--that is
understood,--and as I require only eighty francs for my journey, you see
I am overwhelmed with luxury. But that is not all. What do you say to
this, mother?"

And Albert took out of a little pocket-book with golden clasps, a
remnant of his old fancies, or perhaps a tender souvenir from one of the
mysterious and veiled ladies who used to knock at his little door,--
Albert took out of this pocket-book a note of 1,000 francs.

"What is this?" asked Mercédès.

"A thousand francs."

"But whence have you obtained them?"

"Listen to me, mother, and do not yield too much to agitation." And
Albert, rising, kissed his mother on both cheeks, then stood looking at
her. "You cannot imagine, mother, how beautiful I think you!" said the
young man, impressed with a profound feeling of filial love. "You are,
indeed, the most beautiful and most noble woman I ever saw!"

"Dear child!" said Mercédès, endeavoring in vain to restrain a tear
which glistened in the corner of her eye. "Indeed, you only wanted
misfortune to change my love for you to admiration. I am not unhappy
while I possess my son!"

"Ah, just so," said Albert; "here begins the trial. Do you know the
decision we have come to, mother?"

"Have we come to any?"

"Yes; it is decided that you are to live at Marseilles, and that I am to
leave for Africa, where I will earn for myself the right to use the name
I now bear, instead of the one I have thrown aside." Mercédès sighed.
"Well, mother, I yesterday engaged myself as substitute in the Spahis,"
[*] added the young man, lowering his eyes with a certain feeling of
shame, for even he was unconscious of the sublimity of his self-
abasement. "I thought my body was my own, and that I might sell it. I
yesterday took the place of another. I sold myself for more than I
thought I was worth," he added, attempting to smile; "I fetched 2,000
francs."


* The Spahis are French cavalry reserved for service in Africa.

"Then these 1,000 francs----" said Mercédès, shuddering.

"Are the half of the sum, mother; the other will be paid in a year."

Mercédès raised her eyes to heaven with an expression it would be
impossible to describe, and tears, which had hitherto been restrained,
now yielded to her emotion, and ran down her cheeks.

"The price of his blood!" she murmured.

"Yes, if I am killed," said Albert, laughing. "But I assure you, mother,
I have a strong intention of defending my person, and I never felt half
so strong an inclination to live as I do now."

"Merciful heavens!"

"Besides, mother, why should you make up your mind that I am to be
killed? Has Lamoricière, that Ney of the South, been killed? Has
Changarnier been killed? Has Bedeau been killed? Has Morrel, whom we
know, been killed? Think of your joy, mother, when you see me return
with an embroidered uniform! I declare, I expect to look magnificent in
it, and chose that regiment only from vanity." Mercédès sighed while
endeavoring to smile; the devoted mother felt that she ought not to
allow the whole weight of the sacrifice to fall upon her son. "Well, now
you understand, mother!" continued Albert; "here are more than 4,000
francs settled on you; upon these you can live at least two years."

"Do you think so?" said Mercédès. These words were uttered in so
mournful a tone that their real meaning did not escape Albert; he felt
his heart beat, and taking his mother's hand within his own he said,
tenderly,--

"Yes, you will live!"
