you, with a fierce moustache and a long sabre, but they think they may
crush a poor weeping girl with impunity."

"Ah, Valentine, I assure you you are mistaken."

"If it were otherwise--if he treated me diplomatically--that is to say,
like a man who wishes, by some means or other, to obtain a footing in
the house, so that he may ultimately gain the power of dictating to its
occupants--he would, if it had been but once, have honored me with the
smile which you extol so loudly; but no, he saw that I was unhappy, he
understood that I could be of no use to him, and therefore paid no
attention to me whatever. Who knows but that, in order to please Madame
de Villefort and my father, he may not persecute me by every means in
his power? It is not just that he should despise me so, without any
reason. Ah, forgive me," said Valentine, perceiving the effect which her
words were producing on Maximilian: "I have done wrong, for I have given
utterance to thoughts concerning that man which I did not even know
existed in my heart. I do not deny the influence of which you speak, or
that I have not myself experienced it, but with me it has been
productive of evil rather than good."

"Well, Valentine," said Morrel with a sigh, "we will not discuss the
matter further. I will not make a confidant of him."

"Alas," said Valentine, "I see that I have given you pain. I can only
say how sincerely I ask pardon for having grieved you. But, indeed, I am
not prejudiced beyond the power of conviction. Tell me what this Count
of Monte Cristo has done for you."


"I own that your question embarrasses me, Valentine, for I cannot say
that the count has rendered me any ostensible service. Still, as I have
already told you I have an instinctive affection for him, the source of
which I cannot explain to you. Has the sun done anything for me? No; he
warms me with his rays, and it is by his light that I see you--nothing
more. Has such and such a perfume done anything for me? No; its odor
charms one of my senses--that is all I can say when I am asked why I
praise it. My friendship for him is as strange and unaccountable as his
for me. A secret voice seems to whisper to me that there must be
something more than chance in this unexpected reciprocity of friendship.
In his most simple actions, as well as in his most secret thoughts, I
find a relation to my own. You will perhaps smile at me when I tell you
that, ever since I have known this man, I have involuntarily entertained
the idea that all the good fortune which has befallen me originated from
him. However, I have managed to live thirty years without this
protection, you will say; but I will endeavor a little to illustrate my
meaning. He invited me to dine with him on Saturday, which was a very
natural thing for him to do. Well, what have I learned since? That your
mother and M. de Villefort are both coming to this dinner. I shall meet
them there, and who knows what future advantages may result from the
interview? This may appear to you to be no unusual combination of
circumstances; nevertheless, I perceive some hidden plot in the
arrangement--something, in fact, more than is apparent on a casual view
of the subject. I believe that this singular man, who appears to fathom
the motives of everyone, has purposely arranged for me to meet M. and
Madame de Villefort, and sometimes, I confess, I have gone so far as to
try to read in his eyes whether he was in possession of the secret of
our love."

"My good friend," said Valentine, "I should take you for a visionary,
and should tremble for your reason, if I were always to hear you talk in
a strain similar to this. Is it possible that you can see anything more
than the merest chance in this meeting? Pray reflect a little. My
father, who never goes out, has several times been on the point of
refusing this invitation; Madame de Villefort, on the contrary, is
burning with the desire of seeing this extraordinary nabob in his own
house, therefore, she has with great difficulty prevailed on my father
to accompany her. No, no; it is as I have said, Maximilian,--there is no
one in the world of whom I can ask help but yourself and my grandfather,
who is little better than a corpse."

"I see that you are right, logically speaking," said Maximilian; "but
the gentle voice which usually has such power over me fails to convince
me today."

"I feel the same as regards yourself." said Valentine; "and I own that,
if you have no stronger proof to give me----"

"I have another," replied Maximilian; "but I fear you will deem it even
more absurd than the first."

"So much the worse," said Valentine, smiling.

"It is, nevertheless, conclusive to my mind. My ten years of service
have also confirmed my ideas on the subject of sudden inspirations, for
I have several times owed my life to a mysterious impulse which directed
me to move at once either to the right or to the left, in order to
escape the ball which killed the comrade fighting by my side, while it
left me unharmed."

"Dear Maximilian, why not attribute your escape to my constant prayers
for your safety? When you are away, I no longer pray for myself, but for
you."

"Yes, since you have known me," said Morrel, smiling; "but that cannot
apply to the time previous to our acquaintance, Valentine."


"You are very provoking, and will not give me credit for anything; but
let me hear this second proof, which you yourself own to be absurd."

"Well, look through this opening, and you will see the beautiful new
horse which I rode here."

"Ah, what a beautiful creature!" cried Valentine; "why did you not bring
him close to the gate, so that I could talk to him and pat him?"

"He is, as you see, a very valuable animal," said Maximilian. "You know
that my means are limited, and that I am what would be designated a man
of moderate pretensions. Well, I went to a horse dealer's, where I saw
this magnificent horse, which I have named Médéah. I asked the price;
they told me it was 4,500 francs. I was, therefore, obliged to give it
up, as you may imagine, but I own I went away with rather a heavy heart,
for the horse had looked at me affectionately, had rubbed his head
against me and, when I mounted him, had pranced in the most delightful
way imaginable, so that I was altogether fascinated with him. The same
evening some friends of mine visited me,--M. de Château-Renaud, M.
Debray, and five or six other choice spirits, whom you do not know, even
by name. They proposed a game of _bouillotte_. I never play, for I am
not rich enough to afford to lose, or sufficiently poor to desire to
gain. But I was at my own house, you understand, so there was nothing to
be done but to send for the cards, which I did.

"Just as they were sitting down to table, M. de Monte Cristo arrived. He
took his seat amongst them; they played, and I won. I am almost ashamed
to say that my gains amounted to 5,000 francs. We separated at midnight.
I could not defer my pleasure, so I took a cabriolet and drove to the
horse dealer's. Feverish and excited, I rang at the door. The person who
opened it must have taken me for a madman, for I rushed at once to the
stable. Médéah was standing at the rack, eating his hay. I immediately
put on the saddle and bridle, to which operation he lent himself with
the best grace possible; then, putting the 4,500 francs into the hands
of the astonished dealer, I proceeded to fulfil my intention of passing
the night in riding in the Champs-Élysées. As I rode by the count's
house I perceived a light in one of the windows, and fancied I saw the
shadow of his figure moving behind the curtain. Now, Valentine, I firmly
believe that he knew of my wish to possess this horse, and that he lost
expressly to give me the means of procuring him."

"My dear Maximilian, you are really too fanciful; you will not love even
me long. A man who accustoms himself to live in such a world of poetry
and imagination must find far too little excitement in a common, every-
day sort of attachment such as ours. But they are calling me. Do you
hear?"

"Ah, Valentine," said Maximilian, "give me but one finger through this
opening in the grating, one finger, the littlest finger of all, that I
may have the happiness of kissing it."

"Maximilian, we said we would be to each other as two voices, two
shadows."

"As you will, Valentine."

"Shall you be happy if I do what you wish?"

"Oh, yes!" Valentine mounted on a bench, and passed not only her finger
but her whole hand through the opening. Maximilian uttered a cry of
delight, and, springing forwards, seized the hand extended towards him,
and imprinted on it a fervent and impassioned kiss. The little hand was
then immediately withdrawn, and the young man saw Valentine hurrying
towards the house, as though she were almost terrified at her own
sensations.



Chapter 58. M. Noirtier de Villefort

We will now relate what was passing in the house of the king's attorney
after the departure of Madame Danglars and her daughter, and during the
time of the conversation between Maximilian and Valentine, which we have
just detailed. M. de Villefort entered his father's room, followed by
Madame de Villefort. Both of the visitors, after saluting the old man
and speaking to Barrois, a faithful servant, who had been twenty-five
years in his service, took their places on either side of the paralytic.

M. Noirtier was sitting in an armchair, which moved upon casters, in
which he was wheeled into the room in the morning, and in the same way
drawn out again at night. He was placed before a large glass, which
reflected the whole apartment, and so, without any attempt to move,
which would have been impossible, he could see all who entered the room
and everything which was going on around him. M. Noirtier, although
almost as immovable as a corpse, looked at the new-comers with a quick
and intelligent expression, perceiving at once, by their ceremonious
courtesy, that they were come on business of an unexpected and official
character. Sight and hearing were the only senses remaining, and they,
like two solitary sparks, remained to animate the miserable body which
seemed fit for nothing but the grave; it was only, however, by means of
one of these senses that he could reveal the thoughts and feelings that
still occupied his mind, and the look by which he gave expression to his
inner life was like the distant gleam of a candle which a traveller sees
by night across some desert place, and knows that a living being dwells
beyond the silence and obscurity. Noirtier's hair was long and white,
and flowed over his shoulders; while in his eyes, shaded by thick black
lashes, was concentrated, as it often happens with an organ which is
used to the exclusion of the others, all the activity, address, force,
and intelligence which were formerly diffused over his whole body; and
so although the movement of the arm, the sound of the voice, and the
agility of the body, were wanting, the speaking eye sufficed for all. He
commanded with it; it was the medium through which his thanks were
