"Oh, my poor mother," said Villefort, "to have such duties to perform at
your age after such a blow!"


"God has supported me through all; and then, my dear marquis, he would
certainly have done everything for me that I performed for him. It is
true that since I left him, I seem to have lost my senses. I cannot cry;
at my age they say that we have no more tears,--still I think that when
one is in trouble one should have the power of weeping. Where is
Valentine, sir? It is on her account I am here; I wish to see
Valentine."

Villefort thought it would be terrible to reply that Valentine was at a
ball; so he only said that she had gone out with her step-mother, and
that she should be fetched. "This instant, sir--this instant, I beseech
you!" said the old lady. Villefort placed the arm of Madame de Saint-
Méran within his own, and conducted her to his apartment. "Rest
yourself, mother," he said.

The marchioness raised her head at this word, and beholding the man who
so forcibly reminded her of her deeply-regretted child, who still lived
for her in Valentine, she felt touched at the name of mother, and
bursting into tears, she fell on her knees before an armchair, where she
buried her venerable head. Villefort left her to the care of the women,
while old Barrois ran, half-scared, to his master; for nothing frightens
old people so much as when death relaxes its vigilance over them for a
moment in order to strike some other old person. Then, while Madame de
Saint-Méran remained on her knees, praying fervently, Villefort sent for
a cab, and went himself to fetch his wife and daughter from Madame de
Morcerf's. He was so pale when he appeared at the door of the ball-room,
that Valentine ran to him, saying--

"Oh, father, some misfortune has happened!"

"Your grandmamma has just arrived, Valentine," said M. de Villefort.

"And grandpapa?" inquired the young girl, trembling with apprehension.
M. de Villefort only replied by offering his arm to his daughter. It was
just in time, for Valentine's head swam, and she staggered; Madame de
Villefort instantly hastened to her assistance, and aided her husband in
dragging her to the carriage, saying--"What a singular event! Who could
have thought it? Ah, yes, it is indeed strange!" And the wretched family
departed, leaving a cloud of sadness hanging over the rest of the
evening. At the foot of the stairs, Valentine found Barrois awaiting
her.

"M. Noirtier wishes to see you tonight, he said, in an undertone.

"Tell him I will come when I leave my dear grandmamma," she replied,
feeling, with true delicacy, that the person to whom she could be of the
most service just then was Madame de Saint-Méran. Valentine found her
grandmother in bed; silent caresses, heartwrung sobs, broken sighs,
burning tears, were all that passed in this sad interview, while Madame
de Villefort, leaning on her husband's arm, maintained all outward forms
of respect, at least towards the poor widow. She soon whispered to her
husband, "I think it would be better for me to retire, with your
permission, for the sight of me appears still to afflict your mother-in-
law." Madame de Saint-Méran heard her. "Yes, yes," she said softly to
Valentine, "let her leave; but do you stay." Madame de Villefort left,
and Valentine remained alone beside the bed, for the procureur, overcome
with astonishment at the unexpected death, had followed his wife.
Meanwhile, Barrois had returned for the first time to old Noirtier, who
having heard the noise in the house, had, as we have said, sent his old
servant to inquire the cause; on his return, his quick intelligent eye
interrogated the messenger. "Alas, sir," exclaimed Barrois, "a great
misfortune has happened. Madame de Saint-Méran has arrived, and her
husband is dead!"

M. de Saint-Méran and Noirtier had never been on strict terms of
friendship; still, the death of one old man always considerably affects
another. Noirtier let his head fall upon his chest, apparently
overwhelmed and thoughtful; then he closed one eye, in token of inquiry.
"Mademoiselle Valentine?" Noirtier nodded his head. "She is at the ball,
as you know, since she came to say good-bye to you in full dress."
Noirtier again closed his left eye. "Do you wish to see her?" Noirtier
again made an affirmative sign. "Well, they have gone to fetch her, no
doubt, from Madame de Morcerf's; I will await her return, and beg her to
come up here. Is that what you wish for?"

"Yes," replied the invalid.

Barrois, therefore, as we have seen, watched for Valentine, and informed
her of her grandfather's wish. Consequently, Valentine came up to
Noirtier, on leaving Madame de Saint-Méran, who in the midst of her
grief had at last yielded to fatigue and fallen into a feverish sleep.
Within reach of her hand they placed a small table upon which stood a
bottle of orangeade, her usual beverage, and a glass. Then, as we have
said, the young girl left the bedside to see M. Noirtier. Valentine
kissed the old man, who looked at her with such tenderness that her eyes
again filled with tears, whose sources he thought must be exhausted. The
old gentleman continued to dwell upon her with the same expression.
"Yes, yes," said Valentine, "you mean that I have yet a kind grandfather
left, do you not." The old man intimated that such was his meaning. "Ah,
yes, happily I have," replied Valentine. "Without that, what would
become of me?"

It was one o'clock in the morning. Barrois, who wished to go to bed
himself, observed that after such sad events everyone stood in need of
rest. Noirtier would not say that the only rest he needed was to see his
child, but wished her good-night, for grief and fatigue had made her
appear quite ill. The next morning she found her grandmother in bed; the
fever had not abated, on the contrary her eyes glistened and she
appeared to be suffering from violent nervous irritability. "Oh, dear
grandmamma, are you worse?" exclaimed Valentine, perceiving all these
signs of agitation.

"No, my child, no," said Madame de Saint-Méran; "but I was impatiently
waiting for your arrival, that I might send for your father."

"My father?" inquired Valentine, uneasily.

"Yes, I wish to speak to him." Valentine durst not oppose her
grandmother's wish, the cause of which she did not know, and an instant
afterwards Villefort entered. "Sir," said Madame de Saint-Méran, without
using any circumlocution, and as if fearing she had no time to lose,
"you wrote to me concerning the marriage of this child?"

"Yes, madame," replied Villefort, "it is not only projected but
arranged."

"Your intended son-in-law is named M. Franz d'Epinay?"

"Yes, madame."

"Is he not the son of General d'Epinay who was on our side, and who was
assassinated some days before the usurper returned from the Island of
Elba?"

"The same."

"Does he not dislike the idea of marrying the granddaughter of a
Jacobin?"

"Our civil dissensions are now happily extinguished, mother," said
Villefort; "M. d'Epinay was quite a child when his father died, he knows
very little of M. Noirtier, and will meet him, if not with pleasure, at
least with indifference."

"Is it a suitable match?"

"In every respect."

"And the young man?"

"Is regarded with universal esteem."

"You approve of him?"

"He is one of the most well-bred young men I know." During the whole of
this conversation Valentine had remained silent. "Well, sir," said
Madame de Saint-Méran, after a few minutes' reflection, "I must hasten
the marriage, for I have but a short time to live."

"You, madame?" "You, dear mamma?" exclaimed M. de Villefort and
Valentine at the same time.

"I know what I am saying," continued the marchioness; "I must hurry you,
so that, as she has no mother, she may at least have a grandmother to
bless her marriage. I am all that is left to her belonging to my poor
Renée, whom you have so soon forgotten, sir."

"Ah, madame," said Villefort, "you forget that I was obliged to give a
mother to my child."

"A stepmother is never a mother, sir. But this is not to the purpose,--
our business concerns Valentine, let us leave the dead in peace."

All this was said with such exceeding rapidity, that there was something
in the conversation that seemed like the beginning of delirium.

"It shall be as you wish, madame," said Villefort; "more especially
since your wishes coincide with mine, and as soon as M. d'Epinay arrives
in Paris----"


"My dear grandmother," interrupted Valentine, "consider decorum--the
recent death. You would not have me marry under such sad auspices?"

"My child," exclaimed the old lady sharply, "let us hear none of the
conventional objections that deter weak minds from preparing for the
future. I also was married at the death-bed of my mother, and certainly
I have not been less happy on that account."

"Still that idea of death, madame," said Villefort.

"Still?--Always! I tell you I am going to die--do you understand? Well,
before dying, I wish to see my son-in-law. I wish to tell him to make my
child happy; I wish to read in his eyes whether he intends to obey me;--
in fact, I will know him--I will!" continued the old lady, with a
fearful expression, "that I may rise from the depths of my grave to find
him, if he should not fulfil his duty!"

"Madame," said Villefort, "you must lay aside these exalted ideas, which
almost assume the appearance of madness. The dead, once buried in their
graves, rise no more."

"And I tell you, sir, that you are mistaken. This night I have had a
fearful sleep. It seemed as though my soul were already hovering over my
body, my eyes, which I tried to open, closed against my will, and what
will appear impossible above all to you, sir, I saw, with my eyes shut,
