villa were closed on them for the _festa_ in-doors, he took Teresa quite
away, and as he left her at her home, he said,

"'Teresa, what were you thinking of as you danced opposite the young
Countess of San-Felice?'

"'I thought,' replied the young girl, with all the frankness of her
nature, 'that I would give half my life for a costume such as she wore.'

"'And what said your cavalier to you?'

"'He said it only depended on myself to have it, and I had only one word
to say.'

"'He was right,' said Luigi. 'Do you desire it as ardently as you say?'

"'Yes.'

"'Well, then, you shall have it!'

"The young girl, much astonished, raised her head to look at him, but
his face was so gloomy and terrible that her words froze to her lips. As
Luigi spoke thus, he left her. Teresa followed him with her eyes into
the darkness as long as she could, and when he had quite disappeared,
she went into the house with a sigh.


"That night a memorable event occurred, due, no doubt, to the imprudence
of some servant who had neglected to extinguish the lights. The Villa of
San-Felice took fire in the rooms adjoining the very apartment of the
lovely Carmela. Awakened in the night by the light of the flames, she
sprang out of bed, wrapped herself in a dressing-gown, and attempted to
escape by the door, but the corridor by which she hoped to fly was
already a prey to the flames. She then returned to her room, calling for
help as loudly as she could, when suddenly her window, which was twenty
feet from the ground, was opened, a young peasant jumped into the
chamber, seized her in his arms, and with superhuman skill and strength
conveyed her to the turf of the grass-plot, where she fainted. When she
recovered, her father was by her side. All the servants surrounded her,
offering her assistance. An entire wing of the villa was burnt down; but
what of that, as long as Carmela was safe and uninjured? Her preserver
was everywhere sought for, but he did not appear; he was inquired after,
but no one had seen him. Carmela was greatly troubled that she had not
recognized him. As the count was immensely rich, excepting the danger
Carmela had run,--and the marvellous manner in which she had escaped,
made that appear to him rather a favor of Providence than a real
misfortune,--the loss occasioned by the conflagration was to him but a
trifle.

"The next day, at the usual hour, the two young peasants were on the
borders of the forest. Luigi arrived first. He came toward Teresa in
high spirits, and seemed to have completely forgotten the events of the
previous evening. The young girl was very pensive, but seeing Luigi so
cheerful, she on her part assumed a smiling air, which was natural to
her when she was not excited or in a passion. Luigi took her arm beneath
his own, and led her to the door of the grotto. Then he paused. The
young girl, perceiving that there was something extraordinary, looked at
him steadfastly.

"'Teresa,' said Luigi, 'yesterday evening you told me you would give all
the world to have a costume similar to that of the count's daughter.'

"'Yes,' replied Teresa with astonishment; 'but I was mad to utter such a
wish.'

"'And I replied, "Very well, you shall have it."'

"'Yes,' replied the young girl, whose astonishment increased at every
word uttered by Luigi, 'but of course your reply was only to please me.'

"'I have promised no more than I have given you, Teresa,' said Luigi
proudly. 'Go into the grotto and dress yourself.' At these words he drew
away the stone, and showed Teresa the grotto, lighted up by two wax
lights, which burnt on each side of a splendid mirror; on a rustic
table, made by Luigi, were spread out the pearl necklace and the diamond
pins, and on a chair at the side was laid the rest of the costume.

"Teresa uttered a cry of joy, and, without inquiring whence this attire
came, or even thanking Luigi, darted into the grotto, transformed into a
dressing-room. Luigi pushed the stone behind her, for on the crest of a
small adjacent hill which cut off the view toward Palestrina, he saw a
traveller on horseback, stopping a moment, as if uncertain of his road,
and thus presenting against the blue sky that perfect outline which is
peculiar to distant objects in southern climes. When he saw Luigi, he
put his horse into a gallop and advanced toward him. Luigi was not
mistaken. The traveller, who was going from Palestrina to Tivoli, had
mistaken his way; the young man directed him; but as at a distance of a
quarter of a mile the road again divided into three ways, and on
reaching these the traveller might again stray from his route, he begged
Luigi to be his guide. Luigi threw his cloak on the ground, placed his
carbine on his shoulder, and freed from his heavy covering, preceded the
traveller with the rapid step of a mountaineer, which a horse can
scarcely keep up with. In ten minutes Luigi and the traveller reached
the cross-roads. On arriving there, with an air as majestic as that of
an emperor, he stretched his hand towards that one of the roads which
the traveller was to follow.

"'That is your road, excellency, and now you cannot again mistake.'

"'And here is your recompense,' said the traveller, offering the young
herdsman some small pieces of money.

"'Thank you,' said Luigi, drawing back his hand; 'I render a service, I
do not sell it.'--'Well,' replied the traveller, who seemed used to this
difference between the servility of a man of the cities and the pride of
the mountaineer, 'if you refuse wages, you will, perhaps, accept a
gift.'

"'Ah, yes, that is another thing.'

"'Then,' said the traveller, 'take these two Venetian sequins and give
them to your bride, to make herself a pair of earrings.'

"'And then do you take this poniard,' said the young herdsman; 'you will
not find one better carved between Albano and Civita-Castellana.'

"'I accept it,' answered the traveller, 'but then the obligation will be
on my side, for this poniard is worth more than two sequins.'

"'For a dealer perhaps; but for me, who engraved it myself, it is hardly
worth a piastre.'

"'What is your name?' inquired the traveller.

"'Luigi Vampa,' replied the shepherd, with the same air as he would have
replied, Alexander, King of Macedon. 'And yours?'

"'I,' said the traveller, 'am called Sinbad the Sailor.'"

Franz d'Epinay started with surprise.

"Sinbad the Sailor?" he said.

"Yes," replied the narrator; "that was the name which the traveller gave
to Vampa as his own."

"Well, and what may you have to say against this name?" inquired Albert;
"it is a very pretty name, and the adventures of the gentleman of that
name amused me very much in my youth, I must confess."

Franz said no more. The name of Sinbad the Sailor, as may well be
supposed, awakened in him a world of recollections, as had the name of
the Count of Monte Cristo on the previous evening.

"Proceed!" said he to the host.

"Vampa put the two sequins haughtily into his pocket, and slowly
returned by the way he had gone. As he came within two or three hundred
paces of the grotto, he thought he heard a cry. He listened to know
whence this sound could proceed. A moment afterwards he thought he heard
his own name pronounced distinctly. The cry proceeded from the grotto.
He bounded like a chamois, cocking his carbine as he went, and in a
moment reached the summit of a hill opposite to that on which he had
perceived the traveller. Three cries for help came more distinctly to
his ear. He cast his eyes around him and saw a man carrying off Teresa,
as Nessus, the centaur, carried Deianira.

"This man, who was hastening towards the wood, was already three-
quarters of the way on the road from the grotto to the forest. Vampa
measured the distance; the man was at least two hundred paces in advance
of him, and there was not a chance of overtaking him. The young shepherd
stopped, as if his feet had been rooted to the ground; then he put the
butt of his carbine to his shoulder, took aim at the ravisher, followed
him for a second in his track, and then fired.

"The ravisher stopped suddenly, his knees bent under him, and he fell
with Teresa in his arms. The young girl rose instantly, but the man lay
on the earth struggling in the agonies of death. Vampa then rushed
towards Teresa; for at ten paces from the dying man her legs had failed
her, and she had dropped on her knees, so that the young man feared that
the ball that had brought down his enemy, had also wounded his
betrothed.

"Fortunately, she was unscathed, and it was fright alone that had
overcome Teresa. When Luigi had assured himself that she was safe and
unharmed, he turned towards the wounded man. He had just expired, with
clenched hands, his mouth in a spasm of agony, and his hair on end in
the sweat of death. His eyes remained open and menacing. Vampa
approached the corpse, and recognized Cucumetto.

"From the day on which the bandit had been saved by the two young
peasants, he had been enamoured of Teresa, and had sworn she should be
his. From that time he had watched them, and profiting by the moment
when her lover had left her alone, had carried her off, and believed he
at length had her in his power, when the ball, directed by the unerring
skill of the young herdsman, had pierced his heart. Vampa gazed on him
for a moment without betraying the slightest emotion; while, on the
contrary, Teresa, shuddering in every limb, dared not approach the slain
ruffian but by degrees, and threw a hesitating glance at the dead body
over the shoulder of her lover. Suddenly Vampa turned toward his
mistress:--'Ah,' said he--'good, good! You are dressed; it is now my
turn to dress myself.'


"Teresa was clothed from head to foot in the garb of the Count of San-
Felice's daughter. Vampa took Cucumetto's body in his arms and conveyed
it to the grotto, while in her turn Teresa remained outside. If a second
traveller had passed, he would have seen a strange thing,--a shepherdess
watching her flock, clad in a cashmere grown, with ear-rings and
necklace of pearls, diamond pins, and buttons of sapphires, emeralds,
