
"I bequeath to Maximilian Morrel, captain of Spahis,--and son of my
former patron, Pierre Morrel, shipowner at Marseilles,--the sum of
twenty millions, a part of which may be offered to his sister Julia and
brother-in-law Emmanuel, if he does not fear this increase of fortune
may mar their happiness. These twenty millions are concealed in my
grotto at Monte Cristo, of which Bertuccio knows the secret. If his
heart is free, and he will marry Haydée, the daughter of Ali Pasha of
Yanina, whom I have brought up with the love of a father, and who has
shown the love and tenderness of a daughter for me, he will thus
accomplish my last wish. This will has already constituted Haydée
heiress of the rest of my fortune, consisting of lands, funds in
England, Austria, and Holland, furniture in my different palaces and
houses, and which without the twenty millions and the legacies to my
servants, may still amount to sixty millions."


He was finishing the last line when a cry behind him made him start, and
the pen fell from his hand. "Haydée," said he, "did you read it?"

"Oh, my lord," said she, "why are you writing thus at such an hour? Why
are you bequeathing all your fortune to me? Are you going to leave me?"

"I am going on a journey, dear child," said Monte Cristo, with an
expression of infinite tenderness and melancholy; "and if any misfortune
should happen to me----"

The count stopped.

"Well?" asked the young girl, with an authoritative tone the count had
never observed before, and which startled him. "Well, if any misfortune
happen to me," replied Monte Cristo, "I wish my daughter to be happy."
Haydée smiled sorrowfully, and shook her head. "Do you think of dying,
my lord?" said she.

"The wise man, my child, has said, 'It is good to think of death.'"

"Well, if you die," said she, "bequeath your fortune to others, for if
you die I shall require nothing;" and, taking the paper, she tore it in
four pieces, and threw it into the middle of the room. Then, the effort
having exhausted her strength, she fell, not asleep this time, but
fainting on the floor. The count leaned over her and raised her in his
arms; and seeing that sweet pale face, those lovely eyes closed, that
beautiful form motionless and to all appearance lifeless, the idea
occurred to him for the first time, that perhaps she loved him otherwise
than as a daughter loves a father.

"Alas," murmured he, with intense suffering, "I might, then, have been
happy yet." Then he carried Haydée to her room, resigned her to the care
of her attendants, and returning to his study, which he shut quickly
this time, he again copied the destroyed will. As he was finishing, the
sound of a cabriolet entering the yard was heard. Monte Cristo
approached the window, and saw Maximilian and Emmanuel alight. "Good,"
said he; "it was time,"--and he sealed his will with three seals. A
moment afterwards he heard a noise in the drawing-room, and went to open
the door himself. Morrel was there; he had come twenty minutes before
the time appointed. "I am perhaps come too soon, count," said he, "but I
frankly acknowledge that I have not closed my eyes all night, nor has
anyone in my house. I need to see you strong in your courageous
assurance, to recover myself." Monte Cristo could not resist this proof
of affection; he not only extended his hand to the young man, but flew
to him with open arms. "Morrel," said he, "it is a happy day for me, to
feel that I am beloved by such a man as you. Good-morning, Emmanuel; you
will come with me then, Maximilian?"

"Did you doubt it?" said the young captain.

"But if I were wrong----"

"I watched you during the whole scene of that challenge yesterday; I
have been thinking of your firmness all night, and I said to myself that
justice must be on your side, or man's countenance is no longer to be
relied on."

"But, Morrel, Albert is your friend?"

"Simply an acquaintance, sir."

"You met on the same day you first saw me?"

"Yes, that is true; but I should not have recollected it if you had not
reminded me."

"Thank you, Morrel." Then ringing the bell once, "Look." said he to Ali,
who came immediately, "take that to my solicitor. It is my will, Morrel.
When I am dead, you will go and examine it."

"What?" said Morrel, "you dead?"

"Yes; must I not be prepared for everything, dear friend? But what did
you do yesterday after you left me?"

"I went to Tortoni's, where, as I expected, I found Beauchamp and
Château-Renaud. I own I was seeking them."

"Why, when all was arranged?"

"Listen, count; the affair is serious and unavoidable."

"Did you doubt it!"

"No; the offence was public, and everyone is already talking of it."

"Well?"

"Well, I hoped to get an exchange of arms,--to substitute the sword for
the pistol; the pistol is blind."

"Have you succeeded?" asked Monte Cristo quickly, with an imperceptible
gleam of hope.

"No; for your skill with the sword is so well known."

"Ah?--who has betrayed me?"

"The skilful swordsman whom you have conquered."

"And you failed?"

"They positively refused."

"Morrel," said the count, "have you ever seen me fire a pistol?"

"Never."

"Well, we have time; look." Monte Cristo took the pistols he held in his
hand when Mercédès entered, and fixing an ace of clubs against the iron
plate, with four shots he successively shot off the four sides of the
club. At each shot Morrel turned pale. He examined the bullets with
which Monte Cristo performed this dexterous feat, and saw that they were
no larger than buckshot. "It is astonishing," said he. "Look, Emmanuel."
Then turning towards Monte Cristo, "Count," said he, "in the name of all
that is dear to you, I entreat you not to kill Albert!--the unhappy
youth has a mother."

"You are right," said Monte Cristo; "and I have none." These words were
uttered in a tone which made Morrel shudder. "You are the offended
party, count."

"Doubtless; what does that imply?"

"That you will fire first."

"I fire first?"

"Oh, I obtained, or rather claimed that; we had conceded enough for them
to yield us that."

"And at what distance?"

"Twenty paces." A smile of terrible import passed over the count's lips.
"Morrel," said he, "do not forget what you have just seen."

"The only chance for Albert's safety, then, will arise from your
emotion."

"I suffer from emotion?" said Monte Cristo.

"Or from your generosity, my friend; to so good a marksman as you are, I
may say what would appear absurd to another."

"What is that?"

"Break his arm--wound him--but do not kill him."

"I will tell you, Morrel," said the count, "that I do not need
entreating to spare the life of M. de Morcerf; he shall be so well
spared, that he will return quietly with his two friends, while I----"

"And you?"

"That will be another thing; I shall be brought home."

"No, no," cried Maximilian, quite unable to restrain his feelings.

"As I told you, my dear Morrel, M. de Morcerf will kill me." Morrel
looked at him in utter amazement. "But what has happened, then, since
last evening, count?"

"The same thing that happened to Brutus the night before the battle of
Philippi; I have seen a ghost."

"And that ghost----"

"Told me, Morrel, that I had lived long enough." Maximilian and Emmanuel
looked at each other. Monte Cristo drew out his watch. "Let us go," said
he; "it is five minutes past seven, and the appointment was for eight
o'clock." A carriage was in readiness at the door. Monte Cristo stepped
into it with his two friends. He had stopped a moment in the passage to
listen at a door, and Maximilian and Emmanuel, who had considerately
passed forward a few steps, thought they heard him answer by a sigh to a
sob from within. As the clock struck eight they drove up to the place of
meeting. "We are first," said Morrel, looking out of the window. "Excuse
me, sir," said Baptistin, who had followed his master with indescribable
terror, "but I think I see a carriage down there under the trees."

Monte Cristo sprang lightly from the carriage, and offered his hand to
assist Emmanuel and Maximilian. The latter retained the count's hand
between his. "I like," said he, "to feel a hand like this, when its
owner relies on the goodness of his cause."
