sister called to their aid to sustain them under the serious trial which
they felt they would soon have to endure. They had not mistaken the
gravity of this event, for the moment after Morrel had entered his
private office with Cocles, Julie saw the latter leave it pale,
trembling, and his features betraying the utmost consternation. She
would have questioned him as he passed by her, but the worthy creature
hastened down the staircase with unusual precipitation, and only raised
his hands to heaven and exclaimed, "Oh, mademoiselle, mademoiselle, what
a dreadful misfortune! Who could ever have believed it!" A moment
afterwards Julie saw him go upstairs carrying two or three heavy
ledgers, a portfolio, and a bag of money.

Morrel examined the ledgers, opened the portfolio, and counted the
money. All his funds amounted to 6,000 or 8,000 francs, his bills
receivable up to the 5th to 4,000 or 5,000, which, making the best of
everything, gave him 14,000 francs to meet debts amounting to 287,500
francs. He had not even the means for making a possible settlement on
account. However, when Morrel went down to his dinner, he appeared very
calm. This calmness was more alarming to the two women than the deepest
dejection would have been. After dinner Morrel usually went out and used
to take his coffee at the club of the Phocéens, and read the
_Semaphore_; this day he did not leave the house, but returned to his
office.

As to Cocles, he seemed completely bewildered. For part of the day he
went into the courtyard, seated himself on a stone with his head bare
and exposed to the blazing sun. Emmanuel tried to comfort the women, but
his eloquence faltered. The young man was too well acquainted with the
business of the house, not to feel that a great catastrophe hung over
the Morrel family. Night came, the two women had watched, hoping that
when he left his room Morrel would come to them, but they heard him pass
before their door, and trying to conceal the noise of his footsteps.
They listened; he went into his sleeping-room, and fastened the door
inside. Madame Morrel sent her daughter to bed, and half an hour after
Julie had retired, she rose, took off her shoes, and went stealthily
along the passage, to see through the keyhole what her husband was
doing. In the passage she saw a retreating shadow; it was Julie, who,
uneasy herself, had anticipated her mother. The young lady went towards
Madame Morrel.

"He is writing," she said. They had understood each other without
speaking. Madame Morrel looked again through the keyhole, Morrel was
writing; but Madame Morrel remarked, what her daughter had not observed,
that her husband was writing on stamped paper. The terrible idea that he
was writing his will flashed across her; she shuddered, and yet had not
strength to utter a word. Next day M. Morrel seemed as calm as ever,
went into his office as usual, came to his breakfast punctually, and
then, after dinner, he placed his daughter beside him, took her head in
his arms, and held her for a long time against his bosom. In the
evening, Julie told her mother, that although he was apparently so calm,
she had noticed that her father's heart beat violently. The next two
days passed in much the same way. On the evening of the 4th of
September, M. Morrel asked his daughter for the key of his study. Julie
trembled at this request, which seemed to her of bad omen. Why did her
father ask for this key which she always kept, and which was only taken
from her in childhood as a punishment? The young girl looked at Morrel.

"What have I done wrong, father," she said, "that you should take this
key from me?"

"Nothing, my dear," replied the unhappy man, the tears starting to his
eyes at this simple question,--"nothing, only I want it." Julie made a
pretence to feel for the key. "I must have left it in my room," she
said. And she went out, but instead of going to her apartment she
hastened to consult Emmanuel. "Do not give this key to your father,"
said he, "and tomorrow morning, if possible, do not quit him for a
moment." She questioned Emmanuel, but he knew nothing, or would not say
what he knew. During the night, between the 4th and 5th of September,
Madame Morrel remained listening for every sound, and, until three
o'clock in the morning, she heard her husband pacing the room in great
agitation. It was three o'clock when he threw himself on the bed. The
mother and daughter passed the night together. They had expected
Maximilian since the previous evening. At eight o'clock in the morning
Morrel entered their chamber. He was calm; but the agitation of the
night was legible in his pale and careworn visage. They did not dare to
ask him how he had slept. Morrel was kinder to his wife, more
affectionate to his daughter, than he had ever been. He could not cease
gazing at and kissing the sweet girl. Julie, mindful of Emmanuel's
request, was following her father when he quitted the room, but he said
to her quickly,--"Remain with your mother, dearest." Julie wished to
accompany him. "I wish you to do so," said he.

This was the first time Morrel had ever so spoken, but he said it in a
tone of paternal kindness, and Julie did not dare to disobey. She
remained at the same spot standing mute and motionless. An instant
afterwards the door opened, she felt two arms encircle her, and a mouth
pressed her forehead. She looked up and uttered an exclamation of joy.


"Maximilian, my dearest brother!" she cried. At these words Madame
Morrel rose, and threw herself into her son's arms. "Mother," said the
young man, looking alternately at Madame Morrel and her daughter, "what
has occurred--what has happened? Your letter has frightened me, and I
have come hither with all speed."

"Julie," said Madame Morrel, making a sign to the young man, "go and
tell your father that Maximilian has just arrived." The young lady
rushed out of the apartment, but on the first step of the staircase she
found a man holding a letter in his hand.

"Are you not Mademoiselle Julie Morrel?" inquired the man, with a strong
Italian accent.

"Yes, sir," replied Julie with hesitation; "what is your pleasure? I do
not know you."

"Read this letter," he said, handing it to her. Julie hesitated. "It
concerns the best interests of your father," said the messenger.

The young girl hastily took the letter from him. She opened it quickly
and read:

"Go this moment to the Allées de Meillan, enter the house No. 15, ask
the porter for the key of the room on the fifth floor, enter the
apartment, take from the corner of the mantelpiece a purse netted in red
silk, and give it to your father. It is important that he should receive
it before eleven o'clock. You promised to obey me implicitly. Remember
your oath.

"Sinbad the Sailor."

The young girl uttered a joyful cry, raised her eyes, looked round to
question the messenger, but he had disappeared. She cast her eyes again
over the note to peruse it a second time, and saw there was a
postscript. She read:

"It is important that you should fulfil this mission in person and
alone. If you go accompanied by any other person, or should anyone else
go in your place, the porter will reply that he does not know anything
about it."

This postscript decreased greatly the young girl's happiness. Was there
nothing to fear? was there not some snare laid for her? Her innocence
had kept her in ignorance of the dangers that might assail a young girl
of her age. But there is no need to know danger in order to fear it;
indeed, it may be observed, that it is usually unknown perils that
inspire the greatest terror.

Julie hesitated, and resolved to take counsel. Yet, through a singular
impulse, it was neither to her mother nor her brother that she applied,
but to Emmanuel. She hastened down and told him what had occurred on the
day when the agent of Thomson & French had come to her father's, related
the scene on the staircase, repeated the promise she had made, and
showed him the letter. "You must go, then, mademoiselle," said Emmanuel.

"Go there?" murmured Julie.

"Yes; I will accompany you."

"But did you not read that I must be alone?" said Julie.

"And you shall be alone," replied the young man. "I will await you at
the corner of the Rue de Musée, and if you are so long absent as to make
me uneasy, I will hasten to rejoin you, and woe to him of whom you shall
have cause to complain to me!"

"Then, Emmanuel?" said the young girl with hesitation, "it is your
opinion that I should obey this invitation?"

"Yes. Did not the messenger say your father's safety depended upon it?"

"But what danger threatens him, then, Emmanuel?" she asked.

Emmanuel hesitated a moment, but his desire to make Julie decide
immediately made him reply.

"Listen," he said; "today is the 5th of September, is it not?"

"Yes."

"Today, then, at eleven o'clock, your father has nearly three hundred
thousand francs to pay?"

"Yes, we know that."

"Well, then," continued Emmanuel, "we have not fifteen thousand francs
in the house."

"What will happen then?"

"Why, if today before eleven o'clock your father has not found someone
who will come to his aid, he will be compelled at twelve o'clock to
declare himself a bankrupt."

"Oh, come, then, come!" cried she, hastening away with the young man.
During this time, Madame Morrel had told her son everything. The young
man knew quite well that, after the succession of misfortunes which had
befallen his father, great changes had taken place in the style of
living and housekeeping; but he did not know that matters had reached
such a point. He was thunderstruck. Then, rushing hastily out of the
apartment, he ran upstairs, expecting to find his father in his study,
but he rapped there in vain.

While he was yet at the door of the study he heard the bedroom door
open, turned, and saw his father. Instead of going direct to his study,
M. Morrel had returned to his bedchamber, which he was only this moment
quitting. Morrel uttered a cry of surprise at the sight of his son, of
whose arrival he was ignorant. He remained motionless on the spot,
pressing with his left hand something he had concealed under his coat.
Maximilian sprang down the staircase, and threw his arms round his
