baroness, as she laughingly pointed to the beautiful Greek.

"No, no!" exclaimed Debray; "that girl is not his wife: he told us
himself she was his slave. Do you not recollect, Morcerf, his telling us
so at your breakfast?"

"Well, then," said the baroness, "if slave she be, she has all the air
and manner of a princess."

"Of the 'Arabian Nights'?"

"If you like; but tell me, my dear Lucien, what it is that constitutes a
princess. Why, diamonds--and she is covered with them."

"To me she seems overloaded," observed Eugénie; "she would look far
better if she wore fewer, and we should then be able to see her finely
formed throat and wrists."

"See how the artist peeps out!" exclaimed Madame Danglars. "My poor
Eugénie, you must conceal your passion for the fine arts."

"I admire all that is beautiful," returned the young lady.

"What do you think of the count?" inquired Debray; "he is not much
amiss, according to my ideas of good looks."

"The count," repeated Eugénie, as though it had not occurred to her to
observe him sooner; "the count?--oh, he is so dreadfully pale."

"I quite agree with you," said Morcerf; "and the secret of that very
pallor is what we want to find out. The Countess G---- insists upon it
that he is a vampire."

"Then the Countess G---- has returned to Paris, has she?" inquired the
baroness.

"Is that she, mamma?" asked Eugénie; "almost opposite to us, with that
profusion of beautiful light hair?"

"Yes," said Madame Danglars, "that is she. Shall I tell you what you
ought to do, Morcerf?"

"Command me, madame."

"Well, then, you should go and bring your Count of Monte Cristo to us."

"What for?" asked Eugénie.

"What for? Why, to converse with him, of course. Have you really no
desire to meet him?"

"None whatever," replied Eugénie.

"Strange child," murmured the baroness.

"He will very probably come of his own accord," said Morcerf. "There; do
you see, madame, he recognizes you, and bows." The baroness returned the
salute in the most smiling and graceful manner.

"Well," said Morcerf, "I may as well be magnanimous, and tear myself
away to forward your wishes. Adieu; I will go and try if there are any
means of speaking to him."

"Go straight to his box; that will be the simplest plan."

"But I have never been presented."

"Presented to whom?"

"To the beautiful Greek."

"You say she is only a slave?"

"While you assert that she is a queen, or at least a princess. No; I
hope that when he sees me leave you, he will come out."

"That is possible--go."

"I am going," said Albert, as he made his parting bow. Just as he was
passing the count's box, the door opened, and Monte Cristo came forth.
After giving some directions to Ali, who stood in the lobby, the count
took Albert's arm. Carefully closing the box door, Ali placed himself
before it, while a crowd of spectators assembled round the Nubian.

"Upon my word," said Monte Cristo, "Paris is a strange city, and the
Parisians a very singular people. See that cluster of persons collected
around poor Ali, who is as much astonished as themselves; really one
might suppose he was the only Nubian they had ever beheld. Now I can
promise you, that a Frenchman might show himself in public, either in
Tunis, Constantinople, Bagdad, or Cairo, without being treated in that
way."

"That shows that the Eastern nations have too much good sense to waste
their time and attention on objects undeserving of either. However, as
far as Ali is concerned, I can assure you, the interest he excites is
merely from the circumstance of his being your attendant--you, who are
at this moment the most celebrated and fashionable person in Paris."

"Really? and what has procured me so fluttering a distinction?"

"What? why, yourself, to be sure! You give away horses worth a thousand
louis; you save the lives of ladies of high rank and beauty; under the
name of Major Black you run thoroughbreds ridden by tiny urchins not
larger than marmots; then, when you have carried off the golden trophy
of victory, instead of setting any value on it, you give it to the first
handsome woman you think of!"

"And who has filled your head with all this nonsense?"

"Why, in the first place, I heard it from Madame Danglars, who, by the
by, is dying to see you in her box, or to have you seen there by others;
secondly, I learned it from Beauchamp's journal; and thirdly, from my
own imagination. Why, if you sought concealment, did you call your horse
Vampa?"

"That was an oversight, certainly," replied the count; "but tell me,
does the Count of Morcerf never visit the Opera? I have been looking for
him, but without success."

"He will be here tonight."

"In what part of the house?"

"In the baroness's box, I believe."

"That charming young woman with her is her daughter?"

"Yes."

"I congratulate you." Morcerf smiled. "We will discuss that subject at
length some future time," said he. "But what do you think of the music?"

"What music?"

"Why, the music you have been listening to."

"Oh, it is well enough as the production of a human composer, sung by
featherless bipeds, to quote the late Diogenes."


"From which it would seem, my dear count, that you can at pleasure enjoy
the seraphic strains that proceed from the seven choirs of paradise?"

"You are right, in some degree; when I wish to listen to sounds more
exquisitely attuned to melody than mortal ear ever yet listened to, I go
to sleep."

"Then sleep here, my dear count. The conditions are favorable; what else
was opera invented for?"

"No, thank you. Your orchestra is too noisy. To sleep after the manner I
speak of, absolute calm and silence are necessary, and then a certain
preparation----"

"I know--the famous hashish!"

"Precisely. So, my dear viscount, whenever you wish to be regaled with
music come and sup with me."

"I have already enjoyed that treat when breakfasting with you," said
Morcerf.

"Do you mean at Rome?"

"I do."

"Ah, then, I suppose you heard Haydée's guzla; the poor exile frequently
beguiles a weary hour in playing over to me the airs of her native
land." Morcerf did not pursue the subject, and Monte Cristo himself fell
into a silent reverie. The bell rang at this moment for the rising of
the curtain. "You will excuse my leaving you," said the count, turning
in the direction of his box.

"What? Are you going?"

"Pray, say everything that is kind to Countess G---- on the part of her
friend the vampire."

"And what message shall I convey to the baroness!"

"That, with her permission, I shall do myself the honor of paying my
respects in the course of the evening."

The third act had begun; and during its progress the Count of Morcerf,
according to his promise, made his appearance in the box of Madame
Danglars. The Count of Morcerf was not a person to excite either
interest or curiosity in a place of public amusement; his presence,
therefore, was wholly unnoticed, save by the occupants of the box in
which he had just seated himself. The quick eye of Monte Cristo however,
marked his coming; and a slight though meaning smile passed over his
lips. Haydée, whose soul seemed centred in the business of the stage,
like all unsophisticated natures, delighted in whatever addressed itself
to the eye or ear.


The third act passed off as usual. Mesdemoiselles Noblet, Julie, and
Leroux executed the customary pirouettes; Robert duly challenged the
Prince of Granada; and the royal father of the princess Isabella, taking
his daughter by the hand, swept round the stage with majestic strides,
the better to display the rich folds of his velvet robe and mantle.
