who is there at this moment; he is also known to the Abbé Busoni, a
Sicilian priest, of high repute in the East, where he has done much
good."

M. de Villefort replied by ordering the strictest inquiries to be made
respecting these two persons; his orders were executed, and the
following evening he received these details:--

"The abbé, who was in Paris only for a month, inhabited a small two-
storied house behind Saint-Sulpice; there were two rooms on each floor
and he was the only tenant. The two lower rooms consisted of a dining-
room, with a table, chairs, and side-board of walnut,--and a wainscoted
parlor, without ornaments, carpet, or timepiece. It was evident that the
abbé limited himself to objects of strict necessity. He preferred to use
the sitting-room upstairs, which was more library than parlor, and was
furnished with theological books and parchments, in which he delighted
to bury himself for months at a time, according to his valet de chambre.
His valet looked at the visitors through a sort of wicket; and if their
faces were unknown to him or displeased him, he replied that the abbé
was not in Paris, an answer which satisfied most persons, because the
abbé was known to be a great traveller. Besides, whether at home or not,
whether in Paris or Cairo, the abbé always left something to give away,
which the valet distributed through this wicket in his master's name.
The other room near the library was a bedroom. A bed without curtains,
four armchairs, and a couch, covered with yellow Utrecht velvet,
composed, with a _prie-Dieu_, all its furniture. Lord Wilmore resided in
Rue Fontaine-Saint-George. He was one of those English tourists who
consume a large fortune in travelling. He hired the apartment in which
he lived furnished, passed only a few hours in the day there, and rarely
slept there. One of his peculiarities was never to speak a word of
French, which he however wrote with great facility."

The day after this important information had been given to the king's
attorney, a man alighted from a carriage at the corner of the Rue Férou,
and rapping at an olive-green door, asked if the Abbé Busoni were
within. "No, he went out early this morning," replied the valet.

"I might not always be content with that answer," replied the visitor,
"for I come from one to whom everyone must be at home. But have the
kindness to give the Abbé Busoni----"

"I told you he was not at home," repeated the valet. "Then on his return
give him that card and this sealed paper. Will he be at home at eight
o'clock this evening?"

"Doubtless, unless he is at work, which is the same as if he were out."

"I will come again at that time," replied the visitor, who then retired.

At the appointed hour the same man returned in the same carriage, which,
instead of stopping this time at the end of the Rue Férou, drove up to
the green door. He knocked, and it opened immediately to admit him. From
the signs of respect the valet paid him, he saw that his note had
produced a good effect. "Is the abbé at home?" asked he.

"Yes; he is at work in his library, but he expects you, sir," replied
the valet. The stranger ascended a rough staircase, and before a table,
illumined by a lamp whose light was concentrated by a large shade while
the rest of the apartment was in partial darkness, he perceived the abbé
in a monk's dress, with a cowl on his head such as was used by learned
men of the Middle Ages. "Have I the honor of addressing the Abbé
Busoni?" asked the visitor.

"Yes, sir," replied the abbé; "and you are the person whom M. de
Boville, formerly an inspector of prisons, sends to me from the prefect
of police?"

"Exactly, sir."

"One of the agents appointed to secure the safety of Paris?"

"Yes, sir" replied the stranger with a slight hesitation, and blushing.

The abbé replaced the large spectacles, which covered not only his eyes
but his temples, and sitting down motioned to his visitor to do the
same. "I am at your service, sir," said the abbé, with a marked Italian
accent.

"The mission with which I am charged, sir," replied the visitor,
speaking with hesitation, "is a confidential one on the part of him who
fulfils it, and him by whom he is employed." The abbé bowed. "Your
probity," replied the stranger, "is so well known to the prefect that he
wishes as a magistrate to ascertain from you some particulars connected
with the public safety, to ascertain which I am deputed to see you. It
is hoped that no ties of friendship or humane consideration will induce
you to conceal the truth."

"Provided, sir, the particulars you wish for do not interfere with my
scruples or my conscience. I am a priest, sir, and the secrets of
confession, for instance, must remain between me and God, and not
between me and human justice."

"Do not alarm yourself, monsieur, we will duly respect your conscience."

At this moment the abbé pressed down his side of the shade and so raised
it on the other, throwing a bright light on the stranger's face, while
his own remained obscured. "Excuse me, abbé," said the envoy of the
prefect of the police, "but the light tries my eyes very much." The abbé
lowered the shade. "Now, sir, I am listening--go on."

"I will come at once to the point. Do you know the Count of Monte
Cristo?"

"You mean Monsieur Zaccone, I presume?"

"Zaccone?--is not his name Monte Cristo?"

"Monte Cristo is the name of an estate, or, rather, of a rock, and not a
family name."

"Well, be it so--let us not dispute about words; and since M. de Monte
Cristo and M. Zaccone are the same----"

"Absolutely the same."

"Let us speak of M. Zaccone."

"Agreed."

"I asked you if you knew him?"

"Extremely well."

"Who is he?"

"The son of a rich shipbuilder in Malta."

"I know that is the report; but, as you are aware, the police does not
content itself with vague reports."

"However," replied the abbé, with an affable smile, "when that report is
in accordance with the truth, everybody must believe it, the police as
well as all the rest."

"Are you sure of what you assert?"

"What do you mean by that question?"

"Understand, sir, I do not in the least suspect your veracity; I ask if
you are certain of it?"

"I knew his father, M. Zaccone."

"Ah, indeed?"

"And when a child I often played with the son in the timber-yards."

"But whence does he derive the title of count?"

"You are aware that may be bought."

"In Italy?"

"Everywhere."

"And his immense riches, whence does he procure them?"

"They may not be so very great."

"How much do you suppose he possesses?"

"From one hundred and fifty to two hundred thousand livres per annum."

"That is reasonable," said the visitor; "I have heard he had three or
four millions."

"Two hundred thousand per annum would make four millions of capital."

"But I was told he had four millions per annum."

"That is not probable."

"Do you know this Island of Monte Cristo?"

"Certainly, everyone who has come from Palermo, Naples, or Rome to
France by sea must know it, since he has passed close to it and must
have seen it."

"I am told it is a delightful place?"

"It is a rock."

"And why has the count bought a rock?"

"For the sake of being a count. In Italy one must have territorial
possessions to be a count."

"You have, doubtless, heard the adventures of M. Zaccone's youth?"

"The father's?"

"No, the son's."

"I know nothing certain; at that period of his life, I lost sight of my
young comrade."

"Was he in the wars?"

"I think he entered the service."

