
"Certainly I do."

"You are sure he will keep his word with me?"

"To the letter, but at the same time, remember, we must continue to play
our respective parts. I, as a tender father----"

"And I as a dutiful son, as they choose that I shall be descended from
you."

"Whom do you mean by they?"

"_Ma foi_, I can hardly tell, but I was alluding to those who wrote the
letter; you received one, did you not?"

"Yes."

"From whom?"

"From a certain Abbé Busoni."

"Have you any knowledge of him?"

"No, I have never seen him."

"What did he say in the letter?"

"You will promise not to betray me?"

"Rest assured of that; you well know that our interests are the same."

"Then read for yourself;" and the major gave a letter into the young
man's hand. Andrea read in a low voice:

"You are poor; a miserable old age awaits you. Would you like to become
rich, or at least independent? Set out immediately for Paris, and demand
of the Count of Monte Cristo, Avenue des Champs-Élysées, No. 30, the son
whom you had by the Marchesa Corsinari, and who was taken from you at
five years of age. This son is named Andrea Cavalcanti. In order that
you may not doubt the kind intention of the writer of this letter, you
will find enclosed an order for 2,400 francs, payable in Florence, at
Signor Gozzi's; also a letter of introduction to the Count of Monte
Cristo, on whom I give you a draft of 48,000 francs. Remember to go to
the count on the 26th May at seven o'clock in the evening.

(Signed)

"Abbé Busoni."

"It is the same."

"What do you mean?" said the major.

"I was going to say that I received a letter almost to the same effect."

"You?"

"Yes."

"From the Abbé Busoni?"

"No."

"From whom, then?"

"From an Englishman, called Lord Wilmore, who takes the name of Sinbad
the Sailor."

"And of whom you have no more knowledge than I of the Abbé Busoni?"

"You are mistaken; there I am ahead of you."

"You have seen him, then?"

"Yes, once."

"Where?"

"Ah, that is just what I cannot tell you; if I did, I should make you as
wise as myself, which it is not my intention to do."

"And what did the letter contain?"

"Read it."

"'You are poor, and your future prospects are dark and gloomy. Do you
wish for a name? should you like to be rich, and your own master?'"

"_Parbleu!_" said the young man; "was it possible there could be two
answers to such a question?"

"Take the post-chaise which you will find waiting at the Porte de Gênes,
as you enter Nice; pass through Turin, Chambéry, and Pont-de-Beauvoisin.
Go to the Count of Monte Cristo, Avenue des Champs-Élysées, on the 26th
of May, at seven o'clock in the evening, and demand of him your father.
You are the son of the Marchese Cavalcanti and the Marchesa Oliva
Corsinari. The marquis will give you some papers which will certify this
fact, and authorize you to appear under that name in the Parisian world.
As to your rank, an annual income of 50,000 livres will enable you to
support it admirably. I enclose a draft for 5,000 livres, payable on M.
Ferrea, banker at Nice, and also a letter of introduction to the Count
of Monte Cristo, whom I have directed to supply all your wants.

"Sinbad the Sailor."

"Humph," said the major; "very good. You have seen the count, you say?"

"I have only just left him."

"And has he conformed to all that the letter specified?"

"He has."

"Do you understand it?"

"Not in the least."

"There is a dupe somewhere."

"At all events, it is neither you nor I."

"Certainly not."

"Well, then----"

"Why, it does not much concern us, do you think it does?"

"No; I agree with you there. We must play the game to the end, and
consent to be blindfolded."

"Ah, you shall see; I promise you I will sustain my part to admiration."

"I never once doubted your doing so." Monte Cristo chose this moment for
re-entering the drawing-room. On hearing the sound of his footsteps, the
two men threw themselves in each other's arms, and while they were in
the midst of this embrace, the count entered. "Well, marquis," said
Monte Cristo, "you appear to be in no way disappointed in the son whom
your good fortune has restored to you."

"Ah, your excellency, I am overwhelmed with delight."

"And what are your feelings?" said Monte Cristo, turning to the young
man.

"As for me, my heart is overflowing with happiness."

"Happy father, happy son!" said the count.

"There is only one thing which grieves me," observed the major, "and
that is the necessity for my leaving Paris so soon."

"Ah, my dear M. Cavalcanti, I trust you will not leave before I have had
the honor of presenting you to some of my friends."

"I am at your service, sir," replied the major.

"Now, sir," said Monte Cristo, addressing Andrea, "make your
confession."

"To whom?"

"Tell M. Cavalcanti something of the state of your finances."

"_Ma foi!_ monsieur, you have touched upon a tender chord."

"Do you hear what he says, major?"

"Certainly I do."

"But do you understand?"

"I do."

"Your son says he requires money."

"Well, what would you have me do?" said the major.

"You should furnish him with some of course," replied Monte Cristo.

"I?"

"Yes, you," said the count, at the same time advancing towards Andrea,
and slipping a packet of bank-notes into the young man's hand.

"What is this?"

"It is from your father."

"From my father?"

"Yes; did you not tell him just now that you wanted money? Well, then,
he deputes me to give you this."

"Am I to consider this as part of my income on account?"

"No, it is for the first expenses of your settling in Paris."

"Ah, how good my dear father is!"

