
"Yes."

"And you do not wish me to go away without fulfilling your original
intentions?" The old man winked violently. "Well, sir," said the young
girl, "do you understand now, and is your conscience perfectly at rest
on the subject?" But before the notary could answer, Villefort had drawn
him aside. "Sir," said he, "do you suppose for a moment that a man can
sustain a physical shock, such as M. Noirtier has received, without any
detriment to his mental faculties?"

"It is not exactly that, sir," said the notary, "which makes me uneasy,
but the difficulty will be in wording his thoughts and intentions, so as
to be able to get his answers."

"You must see that to be an utter impossibility," said Villefort.
Valentine and the old man heard this conversation, and Noirtier fixed
his eye so earnestly on Valentine that she felt bound to answer to the
look.

"Sir," said she, "that need not make you uneasy, however difficult it
may at first sight appear to be. I can discover and explain to you my
grandfather's thoughts, so as to put an end to all your doubts and fears
on the subject. I have now been six years with M. Noirtier, and let him
tell you if ever once, during that time, he has entertained a thought
which he was unable to make me understand."

"No," signed the old man.

"Let us try what we can do, then," said the notary. "You accept this
young lady as your interpreter, M. Noirtier?"

"Yes."

"Well, sir, what do you require of me, and what document is it that you
wish to be drawn up?" Valentine named all the letters of the alphabet
until she came to W. At this letter the eloquent eye of Noirtier gave
her notice that she was to stop. "It is very evident that it is the
letter W which M. Noirtier wants," said the notary. "Wait," said
Valentine; and, turning to her grandfather, she repeated, "Wa--We--Wi"--
The old man stopped her at the last syllable. Valentine then took the
dictionary, and the notary watched her while she turned over the pages.
She passed her finger slowly down the columns, and when she came to the
word "Will," M. Noirtier's eye bade her stop. "Will," said the notary;
"it is very evident that M. Noirtier is desirous of making his will."

"Yes, yes, yes," motioned the invalid.

"Really, sir, you must allow that this is most extraordinary," said the
astonished notary, turning to M. de Villefort. "Yes," said the
procureur, "and I think the will promises to be yet more extraordinary,
for I cannot see how it is to be drawn up without the intervention of
Valentine, and she may, perhaps, be considered as too much interested in
its contents to allow of her being a suitable interpreter of the obscure
and ill-defined wishes of her grandfather."

"No, no, no," replied the eye of the paralytic.

"What?" said Villefort, "do you mean to say that Valentine is not
interested in your will?"

"No."

"Sir," said the notary, whose interest had been greatly excited, and who
had resolved on publishing far and wide the account of this
extraordinary and picturesque scene, "what appeared so impossible to me
an hour ago, has now become quite easy and practicable, and this may be
a perfectly valid will, provided it be read in the presence of seven
witnesses, approved by the testator, and sealed by the notary in the
presence of the witnesses. As to the time, it will not require very much
more than the generality of wills. There are certain forms necessary to
be gone through, and which are always the same. As to the details, the
greater part will be furnished afterwards by the state in which we find
the affairs of the testator, and by yourself, who, having had the
management of them, can doubtless give full information on the subject.
But besides all this, in order that the instrument may not be contested,
I am anxious to give it the greatest possible authenticity, therefore,
one of my colleagues will help me, and, contrary to custom, will assist
in the dictation of the testament. Are you satisfied, sir?" continued
the notary, addressing the old man.


"Yes," looked the invalid, his eye beaming with delight at the ready
interpretation of his meaning.

"What is he going to do?" thought Villefort, whose position demanded
much reserve, but who was longing to know what his father's intentions
were. He left the room to give orders for another notary to be sent, but
Barrois, who had heard all that passed, had guessed his master's wishes,
and had already gone to fetch one. The procureur then told his wife to
come up. In the course of a quarter of an hour everyone had assembled in
the chamber of the paralytic; the second notary had also arrived. A few
words sufficed for a mutual understanding between the two officers of
the law. They read to Noirtier the formal copy of a will, in order to
give him an idea of the terms in which such documents are generally
couched; then, in order to test the capacity of the testator, the first
notary said, turning towards him,--"When an individual makes his will,
it is generally in favor or in prejudice of some person."

"Yes."

"Have you an exact idea of the amount of your fortune?"

"Yes."

"I will name to you several sums which will increase by gradation; you
will stop me when I reach the one representing the amount of your own
possessions?"

"Yes." There was a kind of solemnity in this interrogation. Never had
the struggle between mind and matter been more apparent than now, and if
it was not a sublime, it was, at least, a curious spectacle. They had
formed a circle round the invalid; the second notary was sitting at a
table, prepared for writing, and his colleague was standing before the
testator in the act of interrogating him on the subject to which we have
alluded. "Your fortune exceeds 300,000 francs, does it not?" asked he.
Noirtier made a sign that it did. "Do you possess 400,000 francs?"
inquired the notary. Noirtier's eye remained immovable.

"Five hundred thousand?" The same expression continued.

"600,000--700,000--800,000--900,000?"

Noirtier stopped him at the last-named sum.

"You are then in possession of 900,000 francs?" asked the notary.

"Yes."

"In landed property?"

"No."

"In stock?"

"Yes."

"The stock is in your own hands?" The look which M. Noirtier cast on
Barrois showed that there was something wanting which he knew where to
find. The old servant left the room, and presently returned, bringing
with him a small casket. "Do you permit us to open this casket?" asked
the notary. Noirtier gave his assent. They opened it, and found 900,000
francs in bank scrip. The first notary handed over each note, as he
examined it, to his colleague.

The total amount was found to be as M. Noirtier had stated. "It is all
as he has said; it is very evident that the mind still retains its full
force and vigor." Then, turning towards the paralytic, he said, "You
possess, then, 900,000 francs of capital, which, according to the manner
in which you have invested it, ought to bring in an income of about
40,000 livres?"

"Yes."

"To whom do you desire to leave this fortune?"

"Oh," said Madame de Villefort, "there is not much doubt on that
subject. M. Noirtier tenderly loves his granddaughter, Mademoiselle de
Villefort; it is she who has nursed and tended him for six years, and
has, by her devoted attention, fully secured the affection, I had almost
said the gratitude, of her grandfather, and it is but just that she
should reap the fruit of her devotion." The eye of Noirtier clearly
showed by its expression that he was not deceived by the false assent
given by Madame de Villefort's words and manner to the motives which she
supposed him to entertain. "Is it, then, to Mademoiselle Valentine de
Villefort that you leave these 900,000 francs?" demanded the notary,
thinking he had only to insert this clause, but waiting first for the
assent of Noirtier, which it was necessary should be given before all
the witnesses of this singular scene. Valentine, when her name was made
the subject of discussion, had stepped back, to escape unpleasant
observation; her eyes were cast down, and she was crying. The old man
looked at her for an instant with an expression of the deepest
tenderness, then, turning towards the notary, he significantly winked
his eye in token of dissent.

"What," said the notary, "do you not intend making Mademoiselle
Valentine de Villefort your residuary legatee?"

"No."

"You are not making any mistake, are you?" said the notary; "you really
mean to declare that such is not your intention?"

"No," repeated Noirtier; "No." Valentine raised her head, struck dumb
with astonishment. It was not so much the conviction that she was
disinherited that caused her grief, but her total inability to account
for the feelings which had provoked her grandfather to such an act. But
Noirtier looked at her with so much affectionate tenderness that she
exclaimed, "Oh, grandpapa, I see now that it is only your fortune of
which you deprive me; you still leave me the love which I have always
enjoyed."

"Ah, yes, most assuredly," said the eyes of the paralytic, for he closed
them with an expression which Valentine could not mistake. "Thank you,
thank you," murmured she. The old man's declaration that Valentine was
not the destined inheritor of his fortune had excited the hopes of
Madame de Villefort; she gradually approached the invalid, and said:
"Then, doubtless, dear M. Noirtier, you intend leaving your fortune to
your grandson, Edward de Villefort?" The winking of the eyes which
answered this speech was most decided and terrible, and expressed a
