"Well," said Albert, with a sigh, "it seems you are determined to marry
me."

"I am determined to try and be on good terms with everybody, at all
events," said Monte Cristo. "But apropos of Debray, how is it that I
have not seen him lately at the baron's house?"

"There has been a misunderstanding."

"What, with the baroness?"

"No, with the baron."

"Has he perceived anything?"

"Ah, that is a good joke!"

"Do you think he suspects?" said Monte Cristo with charming artlessness.

"Where have you come from, my dear count?" said Albert.

"From Congo, if you will."

"It must be farther off than even that."

"But what do I know of your Parisian husbands?"

"Oh, my dear count, husbands are pretty much the same everywhere; an
individual husband of any country is a pretty fair specimen of the whole
race."

"But then, what can have led to the quarrel between Danglars and Debray?
They seemed to understand each other so well," said Monte Cristo with
renewed energy.

"Ah, now you are trying to penetrate into the mysteries of Isis, in
which I am not initiated. When M. Andrea Cavalcanti has become one of
the family, you can ask him that question." The carriage stopped. "Here
we are," said Monte Cristo; "it is only half-past ten o'clock, come in."

"Certainly, I will."

"My carriage shall take you back."

"No, thank you; I gave orders for my _coupé_ to follow me."

"There it is, then," said Monte Cristo, as he stepped out of the
carriage. They both went into the house; the drawing-room was lighted
up--they went in there. "You will make tea for us, Baptistin," said the
count. Baptistin left the room without waiting to answer, and in two
seconds reappeared, bringing on a tray, all that his master had ordered,
ready prepared, and appearing to have sprung from the ground, like the
repasts which we read of in fairy tales. "Really, my dear count," said
Morcerf, "what I admire in you is, not so much your riches, for perhaps
there are people even wealthier than yourself, nor is it only your wit,
for Beaumarchais might have possessed as much,--but it is your manner of
being served, without any questions, in a moment, in a second; it is as
if they guessed what you wanted by your manner of ringing, and made a
point of keeping everything you can possibly desire in constant
readiness."

"What you say is perhaps true; they know my habits. For instance, you
shall see; how do you wish to occupy yourself during tea-time?"

"_Ma foi_, I should like to smoke."

Monte Cristo took the gong and struck it once. In about the space of a
second a private door opened, and Ali appeared, bringing two chibouques
filled with excellent latakia. "It is quite wonderful," said Albert.

"Oh no, it is as simple as possible," replied Monte Cristo. "Ali knows I
generally smoke while I am taking my tea or coffee; he has heard that I
ordered tea, and he also knows that I brought you home with me; when I
summoned him he naturally guessed the reason of my doing so, and as he
comes from a country where hospitality is especially manifested through
the medium of smoking, he naturally concludes that we shall smoke in
company, and therefore brings two chibouques instead of one--and now the
mystery is solved."

"Certainly you give a most commonplace air to your explanation, but it
is not the less true that you----Ah, but what do I hear?" and Morcerf
inclined his head towards the door, through which sounds seemed to issue
resembling those of a guitar.

"_Ma foi_, my dear viscount, you are fated to hear music this evening;
you have only escaped from Mademoiselle Danglars' piano, to be attacked
by Haydée's guzla."

"Haydée--what an adorable name! Are there, then, really women who bear
the name of Haydée anywhere but in Byron's poems?"

"Certainly there are. Haydée is a very uncommon name in France, but is
common enough in Albania and Epirus; it is as if you said, for example,
Chastity, Modesty, Innocence,--it is a kind of baptismal name, as you
Parisians call it."

"Oh, that is charming," said Albert, "how I should like to hear my
countrywomen called Mademoiselle Goodness, Mademoiselle Silence,
Mademoiselle Christian Charity! Only think, then, if Mademoiselle
Danglars, instead of being called Claire-Marie-Eugénie, had been named
Mademoiselle Chastity-Modesty-Innocence Danglars; what a fine effect
that would have produced on the announcement of her marriage!"

"Hush," said the count, "do not joke in so loud a tone; Haydée may hear
you, perhaps."

"And you think she would be angry?"

"No, certainly not," said the count with a haughty expression.

"She is very amiable, then, is she not?" said Albert.

"It is not to be called amiability, it is her duty; a slave does not
dictate to a master."

"Come; you are joking yourself now. Are there any more slaves to be had
who bear this beautiful name?"

"Undoubtedly."

"Really, count, you do nothing, and have nothing like other people. The
slave of the Count of Monte Cristo! Why, it is a rank of itself in
France, and from the way in which you lavish money, it is a place that
must be worth a hundred thousand francs a year."

"A hundred thousand francs! The poor girl originally possessed much more
than that; she was born to treasures in comparison with which those
recorded in the _Thousand and One Nights_ would seem but poverty."

"She must be a princess then."

"You are right; and she is one of the greatest in her country too."

"I thought so. But how did it happen that such a great princess became a
slave?"

"How was it that Dionysius the Tyrant became a schoolmaster? The fortune
of war, my dear viscount,--the caprice of fortune; that is the way in
which these things are to be accounted for."

"And is her name a secret?"

"As regards the generality of mankind it is; but not for you, my dear
viscount, who are one of my most intimate friends, and on whose silence
I feel I may rely, if I consider it necessary to enjoin it--may I not do
so?"

"Certainly; on my word of honor."

"You know the history of the Pasha of Yanina, do you not?"

"Of Ali Tepelini? [*] Oh, yes; it was in his service that my father made
his fortune."

"True, I had forgotten that."


* Ali Pasha, "The Lion," was born at Tepelini, an Albanian village at
the foot of the Klissoura Mountains, in 1741. By diplomacy and success
in arms he became almost supreme ruler of Albania, Epirus, and adjacent
territory. Having aroused the enmity of the Sultan, he was proscribed
and put to death by treachery in 1822, at the age of eighty.--Ed.

"Well, what is Haydée to Ali Tepelini?"

"Merely his daughter."

"What? the daughter of Ali Pasha?"

"Of Ali Pasha and the beautiful Vasiliki."

"And your slave?"

"_Ma foi_, yes."

"But how did she become so?"

"Why, simply from the circumstance of my having bought her one day, as I
was passing through the market at Constantinople."

"Wonderful! Really, my dear count, you seem to throw a sort of magic
influence over all in which you are concerned; when I listen to you,
existence no longer seems reality, but a waking dream. Now, I am perhaps
going to make an imprudent and thoughtless request, but----"

"Say on."

"But, since you go out with Haydée, and sometimes even take her to the
opera----"

"Well?"

"I think I may venture to ask you this favor."

"You may venture to ask me anything."

"Well then, my dear count, present me to your princess."

"I will do so; but on two conditions."

