
"To make you two costumes between now and tomorrow? I ask your
excellencies' pardon, but this is quite a French demand; for the next
week you will not find a single tailor who would consent to sew six
buttons on a waistcoat if you paid him a crown a piece for each button."

"Then I must give up the idea?"

"No; we have them ready-made. Leave all to me; and tomorrow, when you
awake, you shall find a collection of costumes with which you will be
satisfied."

"My dear Albert," said Franz, "leave all to our host; he has already
proved himself full of resources; let us dine quietly, and afterwards go
and see _l'Italienne à Alger!_

"Agreed," returned Albert; "but remember, Signor Pastrini, that both my
friend and myself attach the greatest importance to having tomorrow the
costumes we have asked for."

The host again assured them they might rely on him, and that their
wishes should be attended to; upon which Franz and Albert mounted to
their apartments, and proceeded to disencumber themselves of their
costumes. Albert, as he took off his dress, carefully preserved the
bunch of violets; it was his token reserved for the morrow.

The two friends sat down to table; but they could not refrain from
remarking the difference between the Count of Monte Cristo's table and
that of Signor Pastrini. Truth compelled Franz, in spite of the dislike
he seemed to have taken to the count, to confess that the advantage was
not on Pastrini's side. During dessert, the servant inquired at what
time they wished for the carriage. Albert and Franz looked at each
other, fearing really to abuse the count's kindness. The servant
understood them.

"His excellency the Count of Monte Cristo had," he said, "given positive
orders that the carriage was to remain at their lordships' orders all
day, and they could therefore dispose of it without fear of
indiscretion."


They resolved to profit by the count's courtesy, and ordered the horses
to be harnessed, while they substituted evening dress for that which
they had on, and which was somewhat the worse for the numerous combats
they had sustained.

This precaution taken, they went to the theatre, and installed
themselves in the count's box. During the first act, the Countess G----
entered. Her first look was at the box where she had seen the count the
previous evening, so that she perceived Franz and Albert in the place of
the very person concerning whom she had expressed so strange an opinion
to Franz. Her opera-glass was so fixedly directed towards them, that
Franz saw it would be cruel not to satisfy her curiosity; and, availing
himself of one of the privileges of the spectators of the Italian
theatres, who use their boxes to hold receptions, the two friends went
to pay their respects to the countess. Scarcely had they entered, when
she motioned to Franz to assume the seat of honor. Albert, in his turn,
sat behind.

"Well," said she, hardly giving Franz time to sit down, "it seems you
have nothing better to do than to make the acquaintance of this new Lord
Ruthven, and you are already the best friends in the world."

"Without being so far advanced as that, my dear countess," returned
Franz, "I cannot deny that we have abused his good nature all day."

"All day?"

"Yes; this morning we breakfasted with him; we rode in his carriage all
day, and now we have taken possession of his box."

"You know him, then?"

"Yes, and no."

"How so?"

"It is a long story."

"Tell it to me."

"It would frighten you too much."

"So much the more reason."

"At least wait until the story has a conclusion."

"Very well; I prefer complete histories; but tell me how you made his
acquaintance? Did anyone introduce you to him?"

"No; it was he who introduced himself to us."

"When?"

"Last night, after we left you."

"Through what medium?"

"The very prosaic one of our landlord."

"He is staying, then, at the Hôtel de Londres with you?"

"Not only in the same hotel, but on the same floor."

"What is his name--for, of course, you know?"

"The Count of Monte Cristo."

"That is not a family name?"

"No, it is the name of the island he has purchased."

"And he is a count?"

"A Tuscan count."

"Well, we must put up with that," said the countess, who was herself
from one of the oldest Venetian families. "What sort of a man is he?"

"Ask the Vicomte de Morcerf."

"You hear, M. de Morcerf, I am referred to you," said the countess.

"We should be very hard to please, madam," returned Albert, "did we not
think him delightful. A friend of ten years' standing could not have
done more for us, or with a more perfect courtesy."

"Come," observed the countess, smiling, "I see my vampire is only some
millionaire, who has taken the appearance of Lara in order to avoid
being confounded with M. de Rothschild; and you have seen her?"


"Her?"

"The beautiful Greek of yesterday."

"No; we heard, I think, the sound of her _guzla_, but she remained
perfectly invisible."

"When you say invisible," interrupted Albert, "it is only to keep up the
mystery; for whom do you take the blue domino at the window with the
white curtains?"

"Where was this window with white hangings?" asked the countess.

"At the Rospoli Palace."

"The count had three windows at the Rospoli Palace?"

"Yes. Did you pass through the Corso?"

"Yes."

"Well, did you notice two windows hung with yellow damask, and one with
white damask with a red cross? Those were the count's windows."

"Why, he must be a nabob. Do you know what those three windows were
worth?"

"Two or three hundred Roman crowns?"

"Two or three thousand."

"The deuce."

"Does his island produce him such a revenue?"

"It does not bring him a baiocco."

"Then why did he purchase it?"

"For a whim."

"He is an original, then?"

"In reality," observed Albert, "he seemed to me somewhat eccentric; were
he at Paris, and a frequenter of the theatres, I should say he was a
poor devil literally mad. This morning he made two or three exits worthy
of Didier or Anthony."

At this moment a fresh visitor entered, and, according to custom, Franz
gave up his seat to him. This circumstance had, moreover, the effect of
changing the conversation; an hour afterwards the two friends returned
to their hotel.

Signor Pastrini had already set about procuring their disguises for the
morrow; and he assured them that they would be perfectly satisfied. The
next morning, at nine o'clock, he entered Franz's room, followed by a
tailor, who had eight or ten Roman peasant costumes on his arm; they
selected two exactly alike, and charged the tailor to sew on each of
their hats about twenty yards of ribbon, and to procure them two of the
long silk sashes of different colors with which the lower orders
decorate themselves on fête days.

Albert was impatient to see how he looked in his new dress--a jacket and
breeches of blue velvet, silk stockings with clocks, shoes with buckles,
and a silk waistcoat. This picturesque attire set him off to great
advantage; and when he had bound the scarf around his waist, and when
his hat, placed coquettishly on one side, let fall on his shoulder a
stream of ribbons, Franz was forced to confess that costume has much to
