subject save to yourself. Outwardly and in the eyes of the world, I am
surrounded by kindness and affection; but the reverse is the case. The
general remark is, 'Oh, it cannot be expected that one of so stern a
character as M. Villefort could lavish the tenderness some fathers do on
their daughters. What though she has lost her own mother at a tender
age, she has had the happiness to find a second mother in Madame de
Villefort.' The world, however, is mistaken; my father abandons me from
utter indifference, while my mother-in-law detests me with a hatred so
much the more terrible because it is veiled beneath a continual smile."

"Hate you, sweet Valentine," exclaimed the young man; "how is it
possible for anyone to do that?"

"Alas," replied the weeping girl, "I am obliged to own that my mother-
in-law's aversion to me arises from a very natural source--her
overweening love for her own child, my brother Edward."

"But why should it?"

"I do not know; but, though unwilling to introduce money matters into
our present conversation, I will just say this much--that her extreme
dislike to me has its origin there; and I much fear she envies me the
fortune I enjoy in right of my mother, and which will be more than
doubled at the death of M. and Mme. de Saint-Méran, whose sole heiress I
am. Madame de Villefort has nothing of her own, and hates me for being
so richly endowed. Alas, how gladly would I exchange the half of this
wealth for the happiness of at least sharing my father's love. God
knows, I would prefer sacrificing the whole, so that it would obtain me
a happy and affectionate home."

"Poor Valentine!"

"I seem to myself as though living a life of bondage, yet at the same
time am so conscious of my own weakness that I fear to break the
restraint in which I am held, lest I fall utterly helpless. Then, too,
my father is not a person whose orders may be infringed with impunity;
protected as he is by his high position and firmly established
reputation for talent and unswerving integrity, no one could oppose him;
he is all-powerful even with the king; he would crush you at a word.
Dear Maximilian, believe me when I assure you that if I do not attempt
to resist my father's commands it is more on your account than my own."

"But why, Valentine, do you persist in anticipating the worst,--why
picture so gloomy a future?"

"Because I judge it from the past."

"Still, consider that although I may not be, strictly speaking, what is
termed an illustrious match for you, I am, for many reasons, not
altogether so much beneath your alliance. The days when such
distinctions were so nicely weighed and considered no longer exist in
France, and the first families of the monarchy have intermarried with
those of the empire. The aristocracy of the lance has allied itself with
the nobility of the cannon. Now I belong to this last-named class; and
certainly my prospects of military preferment are most encouraging as
well as certain. My fortune, though small, is free and unfettered, and
the memory of my late father is respected in our country, Valentine, as
that of the most upright and honorable merchant of the city; I say our
country, because you were born not far from Marseilles."

"Don't speak of Marseilles, I beg of you, Maximilian; that one word
brings back my mother to my recollection--my angel mother, who died too
soon for myself and all who knew her; but who, after watching over her
child during the brief period allotted to her in this world, now, I
fondly hope, watches from her home in heaven. Oh, if my mother were
still living, there would be nothing to fear, Maximilian, for I would
tell her that I loved you, and she would protect us."

"I fear, Valentine," replied the lover, "that were she living I should
never have had the happiness of knowing you; you would then have been
too happy to have stooped from your grandeur to bestow a thought on me."

"Now it is you who are unjust, Maximilian," cried Valentine; "but there
is one thing I wish to know."

"And what is that?" inquired the young man, perceiving that Valentine
hesitated.

"Tell me truly, Maximilian, whether in former days, when our fathers
dwelt at Marseilles, there was ever any misunderstanding between them?"

"Not that I am aware of," replied the young man, "unless, indeed, any
ill-feeling might have arisen from their being of opposite parties--your
father was, as you know, a zealous partisan of the Bourbons, while mine
was wholly devoted to the emperor; there could not possibly be any other
difference between them. But why do you ask?"

"I will tell you," replied the young girl, "for it is but right you
should know. Well, on the day when your appointment as an officer of the
Legion of honor was announced in the papers, we were all sitting with my
grandfather, M. Noirtier; M. Danglars was there also--you recollect M.
Danglars, do you not, Maximilian, the banker, whose horses ran away with
my mother-in-law and little brother, and very nearly killed them? While
the rest of the company were discussing the approaching marriage of
Mademoiselle Danglars, I was reading the paper to my grandfather; but
when I came to the paragraph about you, although I had done nothing else
but read it over to myself all the morning (you know you had told me all
about it the previous evening), I felt so happy, and yet so nervous, at
the idea of speaking your name aloud, and before so many people, that I
really think I should have passed it over, but for the fear that my
doing so might create suspicions as to the cause of my silence; so I
summoned up all my courage, and read it as firmly and as steadily as I
could."


"Dear Valentine!"

"Well, would you believe it? directly my father caught the sound of your
name he turned round quite hastily, and, like a poor silly thing, I was
so persuaded that everyone must be as much affected as myself by the
utterance of your name, that I was not surprised to see my father start,
and almost tremble; but I even thought (though that surely must have
been a mistake) that M. Danglars trembled too."

"'Morrel, Morrel,' cried my father, 'stop a bit;' then knitting his
brows into a deep frown, he added, 'surely this cannot be one of the
Morrel family who lived at Marseilles, and gave us so much trouble from
their violent Bonapartism--I mean about the year 1815.'--'Yes,' replied
M. Danglars, 'I believe he is the son of the old shipowner.'"

"Indeed," answered Maximilian; "and what did your father say then,
Valentine?"

"Oh, such a dreadful thing, that I don't dare to tell you."

"Always tell me everything," said Maximilian with a smile.

"'Ah,' continued my father, still frowning, 'their idolized emperor
treated these madmen as they deserved; he called them 'food for powder,'
which was precisely all they were good for; and I am delighted to see
that the present government have adopted this salutary principle with
all its pristine vigor; if Algiers were good for nothing but to furnish
the means of carrying so admirable an idea into practice, it would be an
acquisition well worthy of struggling to obtain. Though it certainly
does cost France somewhat dear to assert her rights in that uncivilized
country.'"

"Brutal politics, I must confess." said Maximilian; "but don't attach
any serious importance, dear, to what your father said. My father was
not a bit behind yours in that sort of talk. 'Why,' said he, 'does not
the emperor, who has devised so many clever and efficient modes of
improving the art of war, organize a regiment of lawyers, judges and
legal practitioners, sending them in the hottest fire the enemy could
maintain, and using them to save better men?' You see, my dear, that for
picturesque expression and generosity of spirit there is not much to
choose between the language of either party. But what did M. Danglars
say to this outburst on the part of the procureur?"

"Oh, he laughed, and in that singular manner so peculiar to himself--
half-malicious, half-ferocious; he almost immediately got up and took
his leave; then, for the first time, I observed the agitation of my
grandfather, and I must tell you, Maximilian, that I am the only person
capable of discerning emotion in his paralyzed frame. And I suspected
that the conversation that had been carried on in his presence (for they
always say and do what they like before the dear old man, without the
smallest regard for his feelings) had made a strong impression on his
mind; for, naturally enough, it must have pained him to hear the emperor
he so devotedly loved and served spoken of in that depreciating manner."

"The name of M. Noirtier," interposed Maximilian, "is celebrated
throughout Europe; he was a statesman of high standing, and you may or
may not know, Valentine, that he took a leading part in every
Bonapartist conspiracy set on foot during the restoration of the
Bourbons."

"Oh, I have often heard whispers of things that seem to me most strange-
-the father a Bonapartist, the son a Royalist; what can have been the
reason of so singular a difference in parties and politics? But to
resume my story; I turned towards my grandfather, as though to question
him as to the cause of his emotion; he looked expressively at the
newspaper I had been reading. 'What is the matter, dear grandfather?'
said I, 'are you pleased?' He gave me a sign in the affirmative. 'With
what my father said just now?' He returned a sign in the negative.
'Perhaps you liked what M. Danglars said?' Another sign in the negative.
'Oh, then, you were glad to hear that M. Morrel (I didn't dare to say
Maximilian) had been made an officer of the Legion of Honor?' He
signified assent; only think of the poor old man's being so pleased to
think that you, who were a perfect stranger to him, had been made an
officer of the Legion of Honor! Perhaps it was a mere whim on his part,
for he is falling, they say, into second childhood, but I love him for
showing so much interest in you."

"How singular," murmured Maximilian; "your father hates me, while your
grandfather, on the contrary--What strange feelings are aroused by
politics."

"Hush," cried Valentine, suddenly; "someone is coming!" Maximilian
leaped at one bound into his crop of lucern, which he began to pull up
in the most ruthless way, under the pretext of being occupied in weeding
it.

"Mademoiselle, mademoiselle!" exclaimed a voice from behind the trees.
"Madame is searching for you everywhere; there is a visitor in the
drawing-room."

"A visitor?" inquired Valentine, much agitated; "who is it?"

"Some grand personage--a prince I believe they said--the Count of Monte
Cristo."

