guests. Lean a little to the left. Stay! look at M. Andrea Cavalcanti,
the young man in a black coat, looking at Murillo's 'Madonna'; now he is
turning." This time Bertuccio would have uttered an exclamation, had not
a look from Monte Cristo silenced him. "Benedetto?" he muttered;
"fatality!"

"Half-past six o'clock has just struck, M. Bertuccio," said the count
severely; "I ordered dinner at that hour, and I do not like to wait;"
and he returned to his guests, while Bertuccio, leaning against the
wall, succeeded in reaching the dining-room. Five minutes afterwards the
doors of the drawing-room were thrown open, and Bertuccio appearing
said, with a violent effort, "The dinner waits."

The Count of Monte Cristo offered his arm to Madame de Villefort. "M. de
Villefort," he said, "will you conduct the Baroness Danglars?"

Villefort complied, and they passed on to the dining-room.



Chapter 63. The Dinner

It was evident that one sentiment affected all the guests on entering
the dining-room. Each one asked what strange influence had brought them
to this house, and yet astonished, even uneasy though they were, they
still felt that they would not like to be absent. The recent events, the
solitary and eccentric position of the count, his enormous, nay, almost
incredible fortune, should have made men cautious, and have altogether
prevented ladies visiting a house where there was no one of their own
sex to receive them; and yet curiosity had been enough to lead them to
overleap the bounds of prudence and decorum. And all present, even
including Cavalcanti and his son, notwithstanding the stiffness of the
one and the carelessness of the other, were thoughtful, on finding
themselves assembled at the house of this incomprehensible man. Madame
Danglars had started when Villefort, on the count's invitation, offered
his arm; and Villefort felt that his glance was uneasy beneath his gold
spectacles, when he felt the arm of the baroness press upon his own.
None of this had escaped the count, and even by this mere contact of
individuals the scene had already acquired considerable interest for an
observer. M. de Villefort had on the right hand Madame Danglars, on his
left Morrel. The count was seated between Madame de Villefort and
Danglars; the other seats were filled by Debray, who was placed between
the two Cavalcanti, and by Château-Renaud, seated between Madame de
Villefort and Morrel.

The repast was magnificent; Monte Cristo had endeavored completely to
overturn the Parisian ideas, and to feed the curiosity as much as the
appetite of his guests. It was an Oriental feast that he offered to
them, but of such a kind as the Arabian fairies might be supposed to
prepare. Every delicious fruit that the four quarters of the globe could
provide was heaped in vases from China and jars from Japan. Rare birds,
retaining their most brilliant plumage, enormous fish, spread upon
massive silver dishes, together with every wine produced in the
Archipelago, Asia Minor, or the Cape, sparkling in bottles, whose
grotesque shape seemed to give an additional flavor to the draught,--all
these, like one of the displays with which Apicius of old gratified his
guests, passed in review before the eyes of the astonished Parisians,
who understood that it was possible to expend a thousand louis upon a
dinner for ten persons, but only on the condition of eating pearls, like
Cleopatra, or drinking refined gold, like Lorenzo de' Medici.

Monte Cristo noticed the general astonishment, and began laughing and
joking about it. "Gentlemen," he said, "you will admit that, when
arrived at a certain degree of fortune, the superfluities of life are
all that can be desired; and the ladies will allow that, after having
risen to a certain eminence of position, the ideal alone can be more
exalted. Now, to follow out this reasoning, what is the marvellous?--
that which we do not understand. What is it that we really desire?--that
which we cannot obtain. Now, to see things which I cannot understand, to
procure impossibilities, these are the study of my life. I gratify my
wishes by two means--my will and my money. I take as much interest in
the pursuit of some whim as you do, M. Danglars, in promoting a new
railway line; you, M. de Villefort, in condemning a culprit to death;
you, M. Debray, in pacifying a kingdom; you, M. de Château-Renaud, in
pleasing a woman; and you, Morrel, in breaking a horse that no one can
ride. For example, you see these two fish; one brought from fifty
leagues beyond St. Petersburg, the other five leagues from Naples. Is it
not amusing to see them both on the same table?"

"What are the two fish?" asked Danglars.

"M. Château-Renaud, who has lived in Russia, will tell you the name of
one, and Major Cavalcanti, who is an Italian, will tell you the name of
the other."

"This one is, I think, a sterlet," said Château-Renaud.

"And that one, if I mistake not, a lamprey."

"Just so. Now, M. Danglars, ask these gentlemen where they are caught."

"Sterlets," said Château-Renaud, "are only found in the Volga."

"And," said Cavalcanti, "I know that Lake Fusaro alone supplies lampreys
of that size."

"Exactly; one comes from the Volga, and the other from Lake Fusaro."

"Impossible!" cried all the guests simultaneously.

"Well, this is just what amuses me," said Monte Cristo. "I am like Nero-
-_cupitor impossibilium_; and that is what is amusing you at this
moment. This fish, which seems so exquisite to you, is very likely no
better than perch or salmon; but it seemed impossible to procure it, and
here it is."

"But how could you have these fish brought to France?"

"Oh, nothing more easy. Each fish was brought over in a cask--one filled
with river herbs and weeds, the other with rushes and lake plants; they
were placed in a wagon built on purpose, and thus the sterlet lived
twelve days, the lamprey eight, and both were alive when my cook seized
them, killing one with milk and the other with wine. You do not believe
me, M. Danglars!"

"I cannot help doubting," answered Danglars with his stupid smile.

"Baptistin," said the count, "have the other fish brought in--the
sterlet and the lamprey which came in the other casks, and which are yet
alive." Danglars opened his bewildered eyes; the company clapped their
hands. Four servants carried in two casks covered with aquatic plants,
and in each of which was breathing a fish similar to those on the table.

"But why have two of each sort?" asked Danglars.

"Merely because one might have died," carelessly answered Monte Cristo.

"You are certainly an extraordinary man," said Danglars; "and
philosophers may well say it is a fine thing to be rich."

"And to have ideas," added Madame Danglars.

"Oh, do not give me credit for this, madame; it was done by the Romans,
who much esteemed them, and Pliny relates that they sent slaves from
Ostia to Rome, who carried on their heads fish which he calls the
_mulus_, and which, from the description, must probably be the goldfish.
It was also considered a luxury to have them alive, it being an amusing
sight to see them die, for, when dying, they change color three or four
times, and like the rainbow when it disappears, pass through all the
prismatic shades, after which they were sent to the kitchen. Their agony
formed part of their merit--if they were not seen alive, they were
despised when dead."

"Yes," said Debray, "but then Ostia is only a few leagues from Rome."

"True," said Monte Cristo; "but what would be the use of living eighteen
hundred years after Lucullus, if we can do no better than he could?" The
two Cavalcanti opened their enormous eyes, but had the good sense not to
say anything. "All this is very extraordinary," said Château-Renaud;
"still, what I admire the most, I confess, is the marvellous promptitude
with which your orders are executed. Is it not true that you only bought
this house five or six days ago?"

"Certainly not longer."

"Well, I am sure it is quite transformed since last week. If I remember
rightly, it had another entrance, and the courtyard was paved and empty;
while today we have a splendid lawn, bordered by trees which appear to
be a hundred years old."

"Why not? I am fond of grass and shade," said Monte Cristo.

"Yes," said Madame de Villefort, "the door was towards the road before,
and on the day of my miraculous escape you brought me into the house
from the road, I remember."

"Yes, madame," said Monte Cristo; "but I preferred having an entrance
which would allow me to see the Bois de Boulogne over my gate."

"In four days," said Morrel; "it is extraordinary!"

"Indeed," said Château-Renaud, "it seems quite miraculous to make a new
house out of an old one; for it was very old, and dull too. I recollect
coming for my mother to look at it when M. de Saint-Méran advertised it
for sale two or three years ago."

"M. de Saint-Méran?" said Madame de Villefort; "then this house belonged
to M. de Saint-Méran before you bought it?"

"It appears so," replied Monte Cristo.

"Is it possible that you do not know of whom you purchased it?"

"Quite so; my steward transacts all this business for me."

"It is certainly ten years since the house had been occupied," said
Château-Renaud, "and it was quite melancholy to look at it, with the
blinds closed, the doors locked, and the weeds in the court. Really, if
the house had not belonged to the father-in-law of the procureur, one
might have thought it some accursed place where a horrible crime had
been committed." Villefort, who had hitherto not tasted the three or
four glasses of rare wine which were placed before him, here took one,
and drank it off. Monte Cristo allowed a short time to elapse, and then
said, "It is singular, baron, but the same idea came across me the first
time I came here; it looked so gloomy I should never have bought it if
my steward had not taken the matter into his own hands. Perhaps the
fellow had been bribed by the notary."

"It is probable," stammered out Villefort, trying to smile; "but I can
assure you that I had nothing to do with any such proceeding. This house
