dishevelled hair, he who had never felt compassion for anyone determined
to seek his father, that he might have someone to whom he could relate
his misfortunes,--some one by whose side he might weep.

He descended the little staircase with which we are acquainted, and
entered Noirtier's room. The old man appeared to be listening
attentively and as affectionately as his infirmities would allow to the
Abbé Busoni, who looked cold and calm, as usual. Villefort, perceiving
the abbé, passed his hand across his brow.

He recollected the call he had made upon him after the dinner at
Auteuil, and then the visit the abbé had himself paid to his house on
the day of Valentine's death. "You here, sir!" he exclaimed; "do you,
then, never appear but to act as an escort to death?"

Busoni turned around, and, perceiving the excitement depicted on the
magistrate's face, the savage lustre of his eyes, he understood that the
revelation had been made at the assizes; but beyond this he was
ignorant.

"I came to pray over the body of your daughter."

"And now why are you here?"

"I come to tell you that you have sufficiently repaid your debt, and
that from this moment I will pray to God to forgive you, as I do."

"Good heavens!" exclaimed Villefort, stepping back fearfully, "surely
that is not the voice of the Abbé Busoni!"

"No!" The abbé threw off his wig, shook his head, and his hair, no
longer confined, fell in black masses around his manly face.

"It is the face of the Count of Monte Cristo!" exclaimed the procureur,
with a haggard expression.

"You are not exactly right, M. Procureur; you must go farther back."

"That voice, that voice!--where did I first hear it?"

"You heard it for the first time at Marseilles, twenty-three years ago,
the day of your marriage with Mademoiselle de Saint-Méran. Refer to your
papers."

"You are not Busoni?--you are not Monte Cristo? Oh, heavens--you are,
then, some secret, implacable, and mortal enemy! I must have wronged you
in some way at Marseilles. Oh, woe to me!"

"Yes; you are now on the right path," said the count, crossing his arms
over his broad chest; "search--search!"

"But what have I done to you?" exclaimed Villefort, whose mind was
balancing between reason and insanity, in that cloud which is neither a
dream nor reality; "what have I done to you? Tell me, then! Speak!"

"You condemned me to a horrible, tedious death; you killed my father;
you deprived me of liberty, of love, and happiness."

"Who are you, then? Who are you?"

"I am the spectre of a wretch you buried in the dungeons of the Château
d'If. God gave that spectre the form of the Count of Monte Cristo when
he at length issued from his tomb, enriched him with gold and diamonds,
and led him to you!"


"Ah, I recognize you--I recognize you!" exclaimed the king's attorney;
"you are----"

"I am Edmond Dantès!"

"You are Edmond Dantès," cried Villefort, seizing the count by the
wrist; "then come here!" And up the stairs he dragged Monte Cristo; who,
ignorant of what had happened, followed him in astonishment, foreseeing
some new catastrophe. "There, Edmond Dantès!" he said, pointing to the
bodies of his wife and child, "see, are you well avenged?" Monte Cristo
became pale at this horrible sight; he felt that he had passed beyond
the bounds of vengeance, and that he could no longer say, "God is for
and with me." With an expression of indescribable anguish he threw
himself upon the body of the child, reopened its eyes, felt its pulse,
and then rushed with him into Valentine's room, of which he double-
locked the door. "My child," cried Villefort, "he carries away the body
of my child! Oh, curses, woe, death to you!" and he tried to follow
Monte Cristo; but as though in a dream he was transfixed to the spot,--
his eyes glared as though they were starting through the sockets; he
griped the flesh on his chest until his nails were stained with blood;
the veins of his temples swelled and boiled as though they would burst
their narrow boundary, and deluge his brain with living fire. This
lasted several minutes, until the frightful overturn of reason was
accomplished; then uttering a loud cry followed by a burst of laughter,
he rushed down the stairs.

A quarter of an hour afterwards the door of Valentine's room opened, and
Monte Cristo reappeared. Pale, with a dull eye and heavy heart, all the
noble features of that face, usually so calm and serene, were overcast
by grief. In his arms he held the child, whom no skill had been able to
recall to life. Bending on one knee, he placed it reverently by the side
of its mother, with its head upon her breast. Then, rising, he went out,
and meeting a servant on the stairs, he asked, "Where is M. de
Villefort?"

The servant, instead of answering, pointed to the garden. Monte Cristo
ran down the steps, and advancing towards the spot designated beheld
Villefort, encircled by his servants, with a spade in his hand, and
digging the earth with fury. "It is not here!" he cried. "It is not
here!" And then he moved farther on, and began again to dig.

Monte Cristo approached him, and said in a low voice, with an expression
almost humble, "Sir, you have indeed lost a son; but----"

Villefort interrupted him; he had neither listened nor heard. "Oh, I
_will_ find it," he cried; "you may pretend he is not here, but I _will_
find him, though I dig forever!" Monte Cristo drew back in horror.

"Oh," he said, "he is mad!" And as though he feared that the walls of
the accursed house would crumble around him, he rushed into the street,
for the first time doubting whether he had the right to do as he had
done. "Oh, enough of this,--enough of this," he cried; "let me save the
last." On entering his house, he met Morrel, who wandered about like a
ghost awaiting the heavenly mandate for return to the tomb. "Prepare
yourself, Maximilian," he said with a smile; "we leave Paris tomorrow."

"Have you nothing more to do there?" asked Morrel.

"No," replied Monte Cristo; "God grant I may not have done too much
already."

The next day they indeed left, accompanied only by Baptistin. Haydée had
taken away Ali, and Bertuccio remained with Noirtier.



Chapter 112. The Departure

The recent events formed the theme of conversation throughout all Paris.
Emmanuel and his wife conversed with natural astonishment in their
little apartment in the Rue Meslay upon the three successive, sudden,
and most unexpected catastrophes of Morcerf, Danglars, and Villefort.
Maximilian, who was paying them a visit, listened to their conversation,
or rather was present at it, plunged in his accustomed state of apathy.

"Indeed," said Julie, "might we not almost fancy, Emmanuel, that those
people, so rich, so happy but yesterday, had forgotten in their
prosperity that an evil genius--like the wicked fairies in Perrault's
stories who present themselves unbidden at a wedding or baptism--hovered
over them, and appeared all at once to revenge himself for their fatal
neglect?"

"What a dire misfortune!" said Emmanuel, thinking of Morcerf and
Danglars.

"What dreadful sufferings!" said Julie, remembering Valentine, but whom,
with a delicacy natural to women, she did not name before her brother.

"If the Supreme Being has directed the fatal blow," said Emmanuel, "it
must be that he in his great goodness has perceived nothing in the past
lives of these people to merit mitigation of their awful punishment."

"Do you not form a very rash judgment, Emmanuel?" said Julie. "When my
father, with a pistol in his hand, was once on the point of committing
suicide, had anyone then said, 'This man deserves his misery,' would not
that person have been deceived?"

"Yes; but your father was not allowed to fall. A being was commissioned
to arrest the fatal hand of death about to descend on him."

Emmanuel had scarcely uttered these words when the sound of the bell was
heard, the well-known signal given by the porter that a visitor had
arrived. Nearly at the same instant the door was opened and the Count of
Monte Cristo appeared on the threshold. The young people uttered a cry
of joy, while Maximilian raised his head, but let it fall again
immediately. "Maximilian," said the count, without appearing to notice
the different impressions which his presence produced on the little
circle, "I come to seek you."


"To seek me?" repeated Morrel, as if awakening from a dream.

"Yes," said Monte Cristo; "has it not been agreed that I should take you
with me, and did I not tell you yesterday to prepare for departure?"

"I am ready," said Maximilian; "I came expressly to wish them farewell."

"Whither are you going, count?" asked Julie.

"In the first instance to Marseilles, madame."

"To Marseilles!" exclaimed the young couple.

"Yes, and I take your brother with me."

"Oh, count." said Julie, "will you restore him to us cured of his
melancholy?"--Morrel turned away to conceal the confusion of his
countenance.

"You perceive, then, that he is not happy?" said the count. "Yes,"
replied the young woman; "and fear much that he finds our home but a
dull one."

"I will undertake to divert him," replied the count.
