sign in the affirmative. "I thought I did not mistake. With your lasso
you could stop an ox?" Again Ali repeated his affirmative gesture. "Or a
tiger?" Ali bowed his head in token of assent. "A lion even?" Ali sprung
forwards, imitating the action of one throwing the lasso, then of a
strangled lion.

"I understand," said Monte Cristo; "you wish to tell me you have hunted
the lion?" Ali smiled with triumphant pride as he signified that he had
indeed both chased and captured many lions. "But do you believe you
could arrest the progress of two horses rushing forwards with
ungovernable fury?" The Nubian smiled. "It is well," said Monte Cristo.
"Then listen to me. Ere long a carriage will dash past here, drawn by
the pair of dappled gray horses you saw me with yesterday; now, at the
risk of your own life, you must manage to stop those horses before my
door."

Ali descended to the street, and marked a straight line on the pavement
immediately at the entrance of the house, and then pointed out the line
he had traced to the count, who was watching him. The count patted him
gently on the shoulder, his usual mode of praising Ali, who, pleased and
gratified with the commission assigned him, walked calmly towards a
projecting stone forming the angle of the street and house, and, seating
himself thereon, began to smoke his chibouque, while Monte Cristo re-
entered his dwelling, perfectly assured of the success of his plan.
Still, as five o'clock approached, and the carriage was momentarily
expected by the count, the indication of more than common impatience and
uneasiness might be observed in his manner. He stationed himself in a
room commanding a view of the street, pacing the chamber with restless
steps, stopping merely to listen from time to time for the sound of
approaching wheels, then to cast an anxious glance on Ali; but the
regularity with which the Nubian puffed forth the smoke of his chibouque
proved that he at least was wholly absorbed in the enjoyment of his
favorite occupation. Suddenly a distant sound of rapidly advancing
wheels was heard, and almost immediately a carriage appeared, drawn by a
pair of wild, ungovernable horses, while the terrified coachman strove
in vain to restrain their furious speed.

In the vehicle was a young woman and a child of about seven or eight
clasped in each other's arms. Terror seemed to have deprived them even
of the power of uttering a cry. The carriage creaked and rattled as it
flew over the rough stones, and the slightest obstacle under the wheels
would have caused disaster; but it kept on in the middle of the road,
and those who saw it pass uttered cries of terror.

Ali suddenly cast aside his chibouque, drew the lasso from his pocket,
threw it so skilfully as to catch the forelegs of the near horse in its
triple fold, and suffered himself to be dragged on for a few steps by
the violence of the shock, then the animal fell over on the pole, which
snapped, and therefore prevented the other horse from pursuing its way.
Gladly availing himself of this opportunity, the coachman leaped from
his box; but Ali had promptly seized the nostrils of the second horse,
and held them in his iron grasp, till the beast, snorting with pain,
sunk beside his companion. All this was achieved in much less time than
is occupied in the recital. The brief space had, however, been
sufficient for a man, followed by a number of servants, to rush from the
house before which the accident had occurred, and, as the coachman
opened the door of the carriage, to take from it a lady who was
convulsively grasping the cushions with one hand, while with the other
she pressed to her bosom the young boy, who had lost consciousness.

Monte Cristo carried them both to the salon, and deposited them on a
sofa. "Compose yourself, madame," said he; "all danger is over." The
woman looked up at these words, and, with a glance far more expressive
than any entreaties could have been, pointed to her child, who still
continued insensible. "I understand the nature of your alarms, madame,"
said the count, carefully examining the child, "but I assure you there
is not the slightest occasion for uneasiness; your little charge has not
received the least injury; his insensibility is merely the effects of
terror, and will soon pass."

"Are you quite sure you do not say so to tranquillize my fears? See how
deadly pale he is! My child, my darling Edward; speak to your mother--
open your dear eyes and look on me once again! Oh, sir, in pity send for
a physician; my whole fortune shall not be thought too much for the
recovery of my boy."

With a calm smile and a gentle wave of the hand, Monte Cristo signed to
the distracted mother to lay aside her apprehensions; then, opening a
casket that stood near, he drew forth a phial of Bohemian glass
incrusted with gold, containing a liquid of the color of blood, of which
he let fall a single drop on the child's lips. Scarcely had it reached
them, ere the boy, though still pale as marble, opened his eyes, and
eagerly gazed around him. At this, the delight of the mother was almost
frantic. "Where am I?" exclaimed she; "and to whom am I indebted for so
happy a termination to my late dreadful alarm?"

"Madame," answered the count, "you are under the roof of one who esteems
himself most fortunate in having been able to save you from a further
continuance of your sufferings."

"My wretched curiosity has brought all this about," pursued the lady.
"All Paris rung with the praises of Madame Danglars' beautiful horses,
and I had the folly to desire to know whether they really merited the
high praise given to them."

"Is it possible," exclaimed the count with well-feigned astonishment,
"that these horses belong to the baroness?"

"They do, indeed. May I inquire if you are acquainted with Madame
Danglars?"

"I have that honor; and my happiness at your escape from the danger that
threatened you is redoubled by the consciousness that I have been the
unwilling and the unintentional cause of all the peril you have
incurred. I yesterday purchased these horses of the baron; but as the
baroness evidently regretted parting with them, I ventured to send them
back to her, with a request that she would gratify me by accepting them
from my hands."


"You are, then, doubtless, the Count of Monte Cristo, of whom Hermine
has talked to me so much?"

"You have rightly guessed, madame," replied the count.

"And I am Madame Héloïse de Villefort." The count bowed with the air of
a person who hears a name for the first time. "How grateful will M. de
Villefort be for all your goodness; how thankfully will he acknowledge
that to you alone he owes the existence of his wife and child! Most
certainly, but for the prompt assistance of your intrepid servant, this
dear child and myself must both have perished."

"Indeed, I still shudder at the fearful danger you were placed in."

"I trust you will allow me to recompense worthily the devotion of your
man."

"I beseech you, madame," replied Monte Cristo "not to spoil Ali, either
by too great praise or rewards. I cannot allow him to acquire the habit
of expecting to be recompensed for every trifling service he may render.
Ali is my slave, and in saving your life he was but discharging his duty
to me."

"Nay," interposed Madame de Villefort, on whom the authoritative style
adopted by the count made a deep impression, "nay, but consider that to
preserve my life he has risked his own."

"His life, madame, belongs not to him; it is mine, in return for my
having myself saved him from death." Madame de Villefort made no further
reply; her mind was utterly absorbed in the contemplation of the person
who, from the first instant she saw him, had made so powerful an
impression on her. During the evident preoccupation of Madame de
Villefort, Monte Cristo scrutinized the features and appearance of the
boy she kept folded in her arms, lavishing on him the most tender
endearments. The child was small for his age, and unnaturally pale. A
mass of straight black hair, defying all attempts to train or curl it,
fell over his projecting forehead, and hung down to his shoulders,
giving increased vivacity to eyes already sparkling with a youthful love
of mischief and fondness for every forbidden enjoyment. His mouth was
large, and the lips, which had not yet regained their color, were
particularly thin; in fact, the deep and crafty look, giving a
predominant expression to the child's face, belonged rather to a boy of
twelve or fourteen than to one so young. His first movement was to free
himself by a violent push from the encircling arms of his mother, and to
rush forward to the casket from whence the count had taken the phial of
elixir; then, without asking permission of anyone, he proceeded, in all
the wilfulness of a spoiled child unaccustomed to restrain either whims
or caprices, to pull the corks out of all the bottles.

"Touch nothing, my little friend," cried the count eagerly; "some of
those liquids are not only dangerous to taste, but even to inhale."

Madame de Villefort became very pale, and, seizing her son's arm, drew
him anxiously toward her; but, once satisfied of his safety, she also
cast a brief but expressive glance on the casket, which was not lost
upon the count. At this moment Ali entered. At sight of him Madame de
Villefort uttered an expression of pleasure, and, holding the child
still closer towards her, she said, "Edward, dearest, do you see that
good man? He has shown very great courage and resolution, for he exposed
his own life to stop the horses that were running away with us, and
would certainly have dashed the carriage to pieces. Thank him, then, my
child, in your very best manner; for, had he not come to our aid,
neither you nor I would have been alive to speak our thanks." The child
stuck out his lips and turned away his head in a disdainful manner,
saying, "He's too ugly."


The count smiled as if the child bade fair to realize his hopes, while
Madame de Villefort reprimanded her son with a gentleness and moderation
very far from conveying the least idea of a fault having been committed.
"This lady," said the Count, speaking to Ali in the Arabic language, "is
desirous that her son should thank you for saving both their lives; but
the boy refuses, saying you are too ugly." Ali turned his intelligent
countenance towards the boy, on whom he gazed without any apparent
emotion; but the spasmodic working of the nostrils showed to the
practiced eye of Monte Cristo that the Arab had been wounded to the
heart.

"Will you permit me to inquire," said Madame de Villefort, as she arose
to take her leave, "whether you usually reside here?"

"No, I do not," replied Monte Cristo; "it is a small place I have
purchased quite lately. My place of abode is No. 30, Avenue des Champs-
Élysées; but I see you have quite recovered from your fright, and are,
no doubt, desirous of returning home. Anticipating your wishes, I have
desired the same horses you came with to be put to one of my carriages,
and Ali, he whom you think so very ugly," continued he, addressing the
boy with a smiling air, "will have the honor of driving you home, while
your coachman remains here to attend to the necessary repairs of your
calash. As soon as that important business is concluded, I will have a
