
"I did."

"And you followed the business of a tailor?"

"True, I was a tailor, till the trade fell off. It is so hot at
Marseilles, that really I believe that the respectable inhabitants will
in time go without any clothing whatever. But talking of heat, is there
nothing I can offer you by way of refreshment?"

"Yes; let me have a bottle of your best wine, and then, with your
permission, we will resume our conversation from where we left off."

"As you please, sir," said Caderousse, who, anxious not to lose the
present opportunity of finding a customer for one of the few bottles of
Cahors still remaining in his possession, hastily raised a trap-door in
the floor of the apartment they were in, which served both as parlor and
kitchen. Upon issuing forth from his subterranean retreat at the
expiration of five minutes, he found the abbé seated upon a wooden
stool, leaning his elbow on a table, while Margotin, whose animosity
seemed appeased by the unusual command of the traveller for
refreshments, had crept up to him, and had established himself very
comfortably between his knees, his long, skinny neck resting on his lap,
while his dim eye was fixed earnestly on the traveller's face.

"Are you quite alone?" inquired the guest, as Caderousse placed before
him the bottle of wine and a glass.

"Quite, quite alone," replied the man--"or, at least, practically so,
for my poor wife, who is the only person in the house besides myself, is
laid up with illness, and unable to render me the least assistance, poor
thing!"

"You are married, then?" said the priest, with a show of interest,
glancing round as he spoke at the scanty furnishings of the apartment.

"Ah, sir," said Caderousse with a sigh, "it is easy to perceive I am not
a rich man; but in this world a man does not thrive the better for being
honest." The abbé fixed on him a searching, penetrating glance.

"Yes, honest--I can certainly say that much for myself," continued the
innkeeper, fairly sustaining the scrutiny of the abbé's gaze; "I can
boast with truth of being an honest man; and," continued he
significantly, with a hand on his breast and shaking his head, "that is
more than everyone can say nowadays."

"So much the better for you, if what you assert be true," said the abbé;
"for I am firmly persuaded that, sooner or later, the good will be
rewarded, and the wicked punished."


"Such words as those belong to your profession," answered Caderousse,
"and you do well to repeat them; but," added he, with a bitter
expression of countenance, "one is free to believe them or not, as one
pleases."

"You are wrong to speak thus," said the abbé; "and perhaps I may, in my
own person, be able to prove to you how completely you are in error."

"What mean you?" inquired Caderousse with a look of surprise.

"In the first place, I must be satisfied that you are the person I am in
search of."

"What proofs do you require?"

"Did you, in the year 1814 or 1815, know anything of a young sailor
named Dantès?"

"Dantès? Did I know poor dear Edmond? Why, Edmond Dantès and myself were
intimate friends!" exclaimed Caderousse, whose countenance flushed
darkly as he caught the penetrating gaze of the abbé fixed on him, while
the clear, calm eye of the questioner seemed to dilate with feverish
scrutiny.

"You remind me," said the priest, "that the young man concerning whom I
asked you was said to bear the name of Edmond."

"Said to bear the name!" repeated Caderousse, becoming excited and
eager. "Why, he was so called as truly as I myself bore the appellation
of Gaspard Caderousse; but tell me, I pray, what has become of poor
Edmond? Did you know him? Is he alive and at liberty? Is he prosperous
and happy?"

"He died a more wretched, hopeless, heart-broken prisoner than the
felons who pay the penalty of their crimes at the galleys of Toulon."

A deadly pallor followed the flush on the countenance of Caderousse, who
turned away, and the priest saw him wiping the tears from his eyes with
the corner of the red handkerchief twisted round his head.

"Poor fellow, poor fellow!" murmured Caderousse. "Well, there, sir, is
another proof that good people are never rewarded on this earth, and
that none but the wicked prosper. Ah," continued Caderousse, speaking in
the highly colored language of the south, "the world grows worse and
worse. Why does not God, if he really hates the wicked, as he is said to
do, send down brimstone and fire, and consume them altogether?"

"You speak as though you had loved this young Dantès," observed the
abbé, without taking any notice of his companion's vehemence.

"And so I did," replied Caderousse; "though once, I confess, I envied
him his good fortune. But I swear to you, sir, I swear to you, by
everything a man holds dear, I have, since then, deeply and sincerely
lamented his unhappy fate." There was a brief silence, during which the
fixed, searching eye of the abbé was employed in scrutinizing the
agitated features of the innkeeper.

"You knew the poor lad, then?" continued Caderousse.

"I was called to see him on his dying bed, that I might administer to
him the consolations of religion."

"And of what did he die?" asked Caderousse in a choking voice.

"Of what, think you, do young and strong men die in prison, when they
have scarcely numbered their thirtieth year, unless it be of
imprisonment?" Caderousse wiped away the large beads of perspiration
that gathered on his brow.

"But the strangest part of the story is," resumed the abbé, "that
Dantès, even in his dying moments, swore by his crucified Redeemer, that
he was utterly ignorant of the cause of his detention."


"And so he was," murmured Caderousse. "How should he have been
otherwise? Ah, sir, the poor fellow told you the truth."

"And for that reason, he besought me to try and clear up a mystery he
had never been able to penetrate, and to clear his memory should any
foul spot or stain have fallen on it."

And here the look of the abbé, becoming more and more fixed, seemed to
rest with ill-concealed satisfaction on the gloomy depression which was
rapidly spreading over the countenance of Caderousse.

"A rich Englishman," continued the abbé, "who had been his companion in
misfortune, but had been released from prison during the second
restoration, was possessed of a diamond of immense value; this jewel he
bestowed on Dantès upon himself quitting the prison, as a mark of his
gratitude for the kindness and brotherly care with which Dantès had
nursed him in a severe illness he underwent during his confinement.
Instead of employing this diamond in attempting to bribe his jailers,
who might only have taken it and then betrayed him to the governor,
Dantès carefully preserved it, that in the event of his getting out of
prison he might have wherewithal to live, for the sale of such a diamond
would have quite sufficed to make his fortune."

"Then, I suppose," asked Caderousse, with eager, glowing looks, "that it
was a stone of immense value?"

"Why, everything is relative," answered the abbé. "To one in Edmond's
position the diamond certainly was of great value. It was estimated at
fifty thousand francs."

"Bless me!" exclaimed Caderousse, "fifty thousand francs! Surely the
diamond was as large as a nut to be worth all that."

"No," replied the abbé, "it was not of such a size as that; but you
shall judge for yourself. I have it with me."

The sharp gaze of Caderousse was instantly directed towards the priest's
garments, as though hoping to discover the location of the treasure.
Calmly drawing forth from his pocket a small box covered with black
shagreen, the abbé opened it, and displayed to the dazzled eyes of
Caderousse the sparkling jewel it contained, set in a ring of admirable
workmanship. "And that diamond," cried Caderousse, almost breathless
with eager admiration, "you say, is worth fifty thousand francs?"

"It is, without the setting, which is also valuable," replied the abbé,
as he closed the box, and returned it to his pocket, while its brilliant
hues seemed still to dance before the eyes of the fascinated innkeeper.

"But how comes the diamond in your possession, sir? Did Edmond make you
his heir?"

"No, merely his testamentary executor. 'I once possessed four dear and
faithful friends, besides the maiden to whom I was betrothed' he said;
'and I feel convinced they have all unfeignedly grieved over my loss.
The name of one of the four friends is Caderousse.'" The innkeeper
shivered.

"'Another of the number,'" continued the abbé, without seeming to notice
the emotion of Caderousse, "'is called Danglars; and the third, in spite
of being my rival, entertained a very sincere affection for me.'" A
fiendish smile played over the features of Caderousse, who was about to
break in upon the abbé's speech, when the latter, waving his hand, said,
"Allow me to finish first, and then if you have any observations to
make, you can do so afterwards. 'The third of my friends, although my
rival, was much attached to me,--his name was Fernand; that of my
betrothed was'--Stay, stay," continued the abbé, "I have forgotten what
he called her."

"Mercédès," said Caderousse eagerly.

"True," said the abbé, with a stifled sigh, "Mercédès it was."

"Go on," urged Caderousse.

"Bring me a _carafe_ of water," said the abbé.
