conveyed. In short, his whole appearance produced on the mind the
impression of a corpse with living eyes, and nothing could be more
startling than to observe the expression of anger or joy suddenly
lighting up these organs, while the rest of the rigid and marble-like
features were utterly deprived of the power of participation. Three
persons only could understand this language of the poor paralytic; these
were Villefort, Valentine, and the old servant of whom we have already
spoken. But as Villefort saw his father but seldom, and then only when
absolutely obliged, and as he never took any pains to please or gratify
him when he was there, all the old man's happiness was centred in his
granddaughter. Valentine, by means of her love, her patience, and her
devotion, had learned to read in Noirtier's look all the varied feelings
which were passing in his mind. To this dumb language, which was so
unintelligible to others, she answered by throwing her whole soul into
the expression of her countenance, and in this manner were the
conversations sustained between the blooming girl and the helpless
invalid, whose body could scarcely be called a living one, but who,
nevertheless, possessed a fund of knowledge and penetration, united with
a will as powerful as ever although clogged by a body rendered utterly
incapable of obeying its impulses. Valentine had solved the problem, and
was able easily to understand his thoughts, and to convey her own in
return, and, through her untiring and devoted assiduity, it was seldom
that, in the ordinary transactions of every-day life, she failed to
anticipate the wishes of the living, thinking mind, or the wants of the
almost inanimate body. As to the servant, he had, as we have said, been
with his master for five and twenty years, therefore he knew all his
habits, and it was seldom that Noirtier found it necessary to ask for
anything, so prompt was he in administering to all the necessities of
the invalid. Villefort did not need the help of either Valentine or the
domestic in order to carry on with his father the strange conversation
which he was about to begin. As we have said, he perfectly understood
the old man's vocabulary, and if he did not use it more often, it was
only indifference and _ennui_ which prevented him from so doing. He
therefore allowed Valentine to go into the garden, sent away Barrois,
and after having seated himself at his father's right hand, while Madame
de Villefort placed herself on the left, he addressed him thus:--

"I trust you will not be displeased, sir, that Valentine has not come
with us, or that I dismissed Barrois, for our conference will be one
which could not with propriety be carried on in the presence of either.
Madame de Villefort and I have a communication to make to you."

Noirtier's face remained perfectly passive during this long preamble,
while, on the contrary, Villefort's eye was endeavoring to penetrate
into the inmost recesses of the old man's heart.

"This communication," continued the procureur, in that cold and decisive
tone which seemed at once to preclude all discussion, "will, we are
sure, meet with your approbation." The eye of the invalid still retained
that vacancy of expression which prevented his son from obtaining any
knowledge of the feelings which were passing in his mind; he listened,
nothing more. "Sir," resumed Villefort, "we are thinking of marrying
Valentine." Had the old man's face been moulded in wax it could not have
shown less emotion at this news than was now to be traced there. "The
marriage will take place in less than three months," said Villefort.
Noirtier's eye still retained its inanimate expression.

Madame de Villefort now took her part in the conversation and added,--
"We thought this news would possess an interest for you, sir, who have
always entertained a great affection for Valentine; it therefore only
now remains for us to tell you the name of the young man for whom she is
destined. It is one of the most desirable connections which could
possibly be formed; he possesses fortune, a high rank in society, and
every personal qualification likely to render Valentine supremely
happy,--his name, moreover, cannot be wholly unknown to you. It is M.
Franz de Quesnel, Baron d'Epinay."

While his wife was speaking, Villefort had narrowly watched the old
man's countenance. When Madame de Villefort pronounced the name of
Franz, the pupil of M. Noirtier's eye began to dilate, and his eyelids
trembled with the same movement that may be perceived on the lips of an
individual about to speak, and he darted a lightning glance at Madame de
Villefort and his son. The procureur, who knew the political hatred
which had formerly existed between M. Noirtier and the elder d'Epinay,
well understood the agitation and anger which the announcement had
produced; but, feigning not to perceive either, he immediately resumed
the narrative begun by his wife. "Sir," said he, "you are aware that
Valentine is about to enter her nineteenth year, which renders it
important that she should lose no time in forming a suitable alliance.
Nevertheless, you have not been forgotten in our plans, and we have
fully ascertained beforehand that Valentine's future husband will
consent, not to live in this house, for that might not be pleasant for
the young people, but that you should live with them; so that you and
Valentine, who are so attached to each other, would not be separated,
and you would be able to pursue exactly the same course of life which
you have hitherto done, and thus, instead of losing, you will be a
gainer by the change, as it will secure to you two children instead of
one, to watch over and comfort you."

Noirtier's look was furious; it was very evident that something
desperate was passing in the old man's mind, for a cry of anger and
grief rose in his throat, and not being able to find vent in utterance,
appeared almost to choke him, for his face and lips turned quite purple
with the struggle. Villefort quietly opened a window, saying, "It is
very warm, and the heat affects M. Noirtier." He then returned to his
place, but did not sit down. "This marriage," added Madame de Villefort,
"is quite agreeable to the wishes of M. d'Epinay and his family;
besides, he had no relations nearer than an uncle and aunt, his mother
having died at his birth, and his father having been assassinated in
1815, that is to say, when he was but two years old; it naturally
followed that the child was permitted to choose his own pursuits, and he
has, therefore, seldom acknowledged any other authority but that of his
own will."


"That assassination was a mysterious affair," said Villefort, "and the
perpetrators have hitherto escaped detection, although suspicion has
fallen on the head of more than one person." Noirtier made such an
effort that his lips expanded into a smile.

"Now," continued Villefort, "those to whom the guilt really belongs, by
whom the crime was committed, on whose heads the justice of man may
probably descend here, and the certain judgment of God hereafter, would
rejoice in the opportunity thus afforded of bestowing such a peace-
offering as Valentine on the son of him whose life they so ruthlessly
destroyed." Noirtier had succeeded in mastering his emotion more than
could have been deemed possible with such an enfeebled and shattered
frame. "Yes, I understand," was the reply contained in his look; and
this look expressed a feeling of strong indignation, mixed with profound
contempt. Villefort fully understood his father's meaning, and answered
by a slight shrug of his shoulders. He then motioned to his wife to take
leave. "Now sir," said Madame de Villefort, "I must bid you farewell.
Would you like me to send Edward to you for a short time?"

It had been agreed that the old man should express his approbation by
closing his eyes, his refusal by winking them several times, and if he
had some desire or feeling to express, he raised them to heaven. If he
wanted Valentine, he closed his right eye only, and if Barrois, the
left. At Madame de Villefort's proposition he instantly winked his eyes.
Provoked by a complete refusal, she bit her lip and said, "Then shall I
send Valentine to you?" The old man closed his eyes eagerly, thereby
intimating that such was his wish. M. and Madame de Villefort bowed and
left the room, giving orders that Valentine should be summoned to her
grandfather's presence, and feeling sure that she would have much to do
to restore calmness to the perturbed spirit of the invalid. Valentine,
with a color still heightened by emotion, entered the room just after
her parents had quitted it. One look was sufficient to tell her that her
grandfather was suffering, and that there was much on his mind which he
was wishing to communicate to her. "Dear grandpapa," cried she, "what
has happened? They have vexed you, and you are angry?" The paralytic
closed his eyes in token of assent. "Who has displeased you? Is it my
father?"

"No."

"Madame de Villefort?"

"No."

"Me?" The former sign was repeated. "Are you displeased with me?" cried
Valentine in astonishment. M. Noirtier again closed his eyes. "And what
have I done, dear grandpapa, that you should be angry with me?" cried
Valentine.

There was no answer, and she continued. "I have not seen you all day.
Has anyone been speaking to you against me?"

"Yes," said the old man's look, with eagerness.

"Let me think a moment. I do assure you, grandpapa--Ah--M. and Madame de
Villefort have just left this room, have they not?"

"Yes."

"And it was they who told you something which made you angry? What was
it then? May I go and ask them, that I may have the opportunity of
making my peace with you?"

"No, no," said Noirtier's look.

"Ah, you frighten me. What can they have said?" and she again tried to
think what it could be.

"Ah, I know," said she, lowering her voice and going close to the old
man. "They have been speaking of my marriage,--have they not?"

"Yes," replied the angry look.

"I understand; you are displeased at the silence I have preserved on the
subject. The reason of it was, that they had insisted on my keeping the
matter a secret, and begged me not to tell you anything of it. They did
not even acquaint me with their intentions, and I only discovered them
by chance, that is why I have been so reserved with you, dear grandpapa.
Pray forgive me." But there was no look calculated to reassure her; all
it seemed to say was, "It is not only your reserve which afflicts me."

"What is it, then?" asked the young girl. "Perhaps you think I shall
abandon you, dear grandpapa, and that I shall forget you when I am
married?"

"No."

"They told you, then, that M. d'Epinay consented to our all living
together?"

"Yes."

"Then why are you still vexed and grieved?" The old man's eyes beamed
with an expression of gentle affection. "Yes, I understand," said
Valentine; "it is because you love me." The old man assented. "And you
