
Fortunately, Dantès had learned how to wait; he had waited fourteen
years for his liberty, and now he was free he could wait at least six
months or a year for wealth. Would he not have accepted liberty without
riches if it had been offered to him? Besides, were not those riches
chimerical?--offspring of the brain of the poor Abbé Faria, had they not
died with him? It is true, the letter of the Cardinal Spada was
singularly circumstantial, and Dantès repeated it to himself, from one
end to the other, for he had not forgotten a word.


Evening came, and Edmond saw the island tinged with the shades of
twilight, and then disappear in the darkness from all eyes but his own,
for he, with vision accustomed to the gloom of a prison, continued to
behold it last of all, for he remained alone upon deck. The next morn
broke off the coast of Aleria; all day they coasted, and in the evening
saw fires lighted on land; the position of these was no doubt a signal
for landing, for a ship's lantern was hung up at the mast-head instead
of the streamer, and they came to within a gunshot of the shore. Dantès
noticed that the captain of _La Jeune Amélie_ had, as he neared the
land, mounted two small culverins, which, without making much noise, can
throw a four ounce ball a thousand paces or so.

But on this occasion the precaution was superfluous, and everything
proceeded with the utmost smoothness and politeness. Four shallops came
off with very little noise alongside the lugger, which, no doubt, in
acknowledgement of the compliment, lowered her own shallop into the sea,
and the five boats worked so well that by two o'clock in the morning all
the cargo was out of _La Jeune Amélie_ and on _terra firma_. The same
night, such a man of regularity was the patron of _La Jeune Amélie_, the
profits were divided, and each man had a hundred Tuscan livres, or about
eighty francs. But the voyage was not ended. They turned the bowsprit
towards Sardinia, where they intended to take in a cargo, which was to
replace what had been discharged. The second operation was as successful
as the first, _La Jeune Amélie_ was in luck. This new cargo was destined
for the coast of the Duchy of Lucca, and consisted almost entirely of
Havana cigars, sherry, and Malaga wines.

There they had a bit of a skirmish in getting rid of the duties; the
excise was, in truth, the everlasting enemy of the patron of _La Jeune
Amélie_. A customs officer was laid low, and two sailors wounded; Dantès
was one of the latter, a ball having touched him in the left shoulder.
Dantès was almost glad of this affray, and almost pleased at being
wounded, for they were rude lessons which taught him with what eye he
could view danger, and with what endurance he could bear suffering. He
had contemplated danger with a smile, and when wounded had exclaimed
with the great philosopher, "Pain, thou art not an evil." He had,
moreover, looked upon the customs officer wounded to death, and, whether
from heat of blood produced by the encounter, or the chill of human
sentiment, this sight had made but slight impression upon him. Dantès
was on the way he desired to follow, and was moving towards the end he
wished to achieve; his heart was in a fair way of petrifying in his
bosom. Jacopo, seeing him fall, had believed him killed, and rushing
towards him raised him up, and then attended to him with all the
kindness of a devoted comrade.

This world was not then so good as Doctor Pangloss believed it, neither
was it so wicked as Dantès thought it, since this man, who had nothing
to expect from his comrade but the inheritance of his share of the
prize-money, manifested so much sorrow when he saw him fall.
Fortunately, as we have said, Edmond was only wounded, and with certain
herbs gathered at certain seasons, and sold to the smugglers by the old
Sardinian women, the wound soon closed. Edmond then resolved to try
Jacopo, and offered him in return for his attention a share of his
prize-money, but Jacopo refused it indignantly.

As a result of the sympathetic devotion which Jacopo had from the first
bestowed on Edmond, the latter was moved to a certain degree of
affection. But this sufficed for Jacopo, who instinctively felt that
Edmond had a right to superiority of position--a superiority which
Edmond had concealed from all others. And from this time the kindness
which Edmond showed him was enough for the brave seaman.

Then in the long days on board ship, when the vessel, gliding on with
security over the azure sea, required no care but the hand of the
helmsman, thanks to the favorable winds that swelled her sails, Edmond,
with a chart in his hand, became the instructor of Jacopo, as the poor
Abbé Faria had been his tutor. He pointed out to him the bearings of the
coast, explained to him the variations of the compass, and taught him to
read in that vast book opened over our heads which they call heaven, and
where God writes in azure with letters of diamonds. And when Jacopo
inquired of him, "What is the use of teaching all these things to a poor
sailor like me?" Edmond replied, "Who knows? You may one day be the
captain of a vessel. Your fellow-countryman, Bonaparte, became emperor."
We had forgotten to say that Jacopo was a Corsican.

Two months and a half elapsed in these trips, and Edmond had become as
skilful a coaster as he had been a hardy seaman; he had formed an
acquaintance with all the smugglers on the coast, and learned all the
Masonic signs by which these half pirates recognize each other. He had
passed and re-passed his Island of Monte Cristo twenty times, but not
once had he found an opportunity of landing there. He then formed a
resolution. As soon as his engagement with the patron of _La Jeune
Amélie_ ended, he would hire a small vessel on his own account--for in
his several voyages he had amassed a hundred piastres--and under some
pretext land at the Island of Monte Cristo. Then he would be free to
make his researches, not perhaps entirely at liberty, for he would be
doubtless watched by those who accompanied him. But in this world we
must risk something. Prison had made Edmond prudent, and he was desirous
of running no risk whatever. But in vain did he rack his imagination;
fertile as it was, he could not devise any plan for reaching the island
without companionship.

Dantès was tossed about on these doubts and wishes, when the patron, who
had great confidence in him, and was very desirous of retaining him in
his service, took him by the arm one evening and led him to a tavern on
the Via del' Oglio, where the leading smugglers of Leghorn used to
congregate and discuss affairs connected with their trade. Already
Dantès had visited this maritime Bourse two or three times, and seeing
all these hardy free-traders, who supplied the whole coast for nearly
two hundred leagues in extent, he had asked himself what power might not
that man attain who should give the impulse of his will to all these
contrary and diverging minds. This time it was a great matter that was
under discussion, connected with a vessel laden with Turkey carpets,
stuffs of the Levant, and cashmeres. It was necessary to find some
neutral ground on which an exchange could be made, and then to try and
land these goods on the coast of France. If the venture was successful
the profit would be enormous, there would be a gain of fifty or sixty
piastres each for the crew.

The patron of _La Jeune Amélie_ proposed as a place of landing the
Island of Monte Cristo, which being completely deserted, and having
neither soldiers nor revenue officers, seemed to have been placed in the
midst of the ocean since the time of the heathen Olympus by Mercury, the
god of merchants and robbers, classes of mankind which we in modern
times have separated if not made distinct, but which antiquity appears
to have included in the same category. At the mention of Monte Cristo
Dantès started with joy; he rose to conceal his emotion, and took a turn
around the smoky tavern, where all the languages of the known world were
jumbled in a _lingua franca_. When he again joined the two persons who
had been discussing the matter, it had been decided that they should
touch at Monte Cristo and set out on the following night. Edmond, being
consulted, was of opinion that the island afforded every possible
security, and that great enterprises to be well done should be done
quickly. Nothing then was altered in the plan, and orders were given to
get under weigh next night, and, wind and weather permitting, to make
the neutral island by the following day.



Chapter 23. The Island of Monte Cristo

Thus, at length, by one of the unexpected strokes of fortune which
sometimes befall those who have for a long time been the victims of an
evil destiny, Dantès was about to secure the opportunity he wished for,
by simple and natural means, and land on the island without incurring
any suspicion. One night more and he would be on his way.

The night was one of feverish distraction, and in its progress visions
good and evil passed through Dantès' mind. If he closed his eyes, he saw
Cardinal Spada's letter written on the wall in characters of flame--if
he slept for a moment the wildest dreams haunted his brain. He ascended
into grottos paved with emeralds, with panels of rubies, and the roof
glowing with diamond stalactites. Pearls fell drop by drop, as
subterranean waters filter in their caves. Edmond, amazed, wonderstruck,
filled his pockets with the radiant gems and then returned to daylight,
when he discovered that his prizes had all changed into common pebbles.
He then endeavored to re-enter the marvellous grottos, but they had
suddenly receded, and now the path became a labyrinth, and then the
entrance vanished, and in vain did he tax his memory for the magic and
mysterious word which opened the splendid caverns of Ali Baba to the
Arabian fisherman. All was useless, the treasure disappeared, and had
again reverted to the genii from whom for a moment he had hoped to carry
it off.

The day came at length, and was almost as feverish as the night had
been, but it brought reason to the aid of imagination, and Dantès was
then enabled to arrange a plan which had hitherto been vague and
unsettled in his brain. Night came, and with it the preparation for
departure, and these preparations served to conceal Dantès' agitation.
He had by degrees assumed such authority over his companions that he was
almost like a commander on board; and as his orders were always clear,
distinct, and easy of execution, his comrades obeyed him with celerity
and pleasure.

The old patron did not interfere, for he too had recognized the
superiority of Dantès over the crew and himself. He saw in the young man
his natural successor, and regretted that he had not a daughter, that he
might have bound Edmond to him by a more secure alliance. At seven
o'clock in the evening all was ready, and at ten minutes past seven they
doubled the lighthouse just as the beacon was kindled. The sea was calm,
and, with a fresh breeze from the south-east, they sailed beneath a
bright blue sky, in which God also lighted up in turn his beacon lights,
each of which is a world. Dantès told them that all hands might turn in,
and he would take the helm. When the Maltese (for so they called Dantès)
had said this, it was sufficient, and all went to their bunks
contentedly. This frequently happened. Dantès, cast from solitude into
the world, frequently experienced an imperious desire for solitude; and
what solitude is more complete, or more poetical, than that of a ship
floating in isolation on the sea during the obscurity of the night, in
the silence of immensity, and under the eye of heaven?

Now this solitude was peopled with his thoughts, the night lighted up by
his illusions, and the silence animated by his anticipations. When the
patron awoke, the vessel was hurrying on with every sail set, and every
sail full with the breeze. They were making nearly ten knots an hour.
The Island of Monte Cristo loomed large in the horizon. Edmond resigned
the lugger to the master's care, and went and lay down in his hammock;
but, in spite of a sleepless night, he could not close his eyes for a
moment. Two hours afterwards he came on deck, as the boat was about to
