often he who comes off victorious from the strife, absolved of all crime
in the eyes of the world. No, no," continued the count, "had I to avenge
myself, it is not thus I would take revenge."

"Then you disapprove of duelling? You would not fight a duel?" asked
Albert in his turn, astonished at this strange theory.

"Oh, yes," replied the count; "understand me, I would fight a duel for a
trifle, for an insult, for a blow; and the more so that, thanks to my
skill in all bodily exercises, and the indifference to danger I have
gradually acquired, I should be almost certain to kill my man. Oh, I
would fight for such a cause; but in return for a slow, profound,
eternal torture, I would give back the same, were it possible; an eye
for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, as the Orientalists say,--our masters
in everything,--those favored creatures who have formed for themselves a
life of dreams and a paradise of realities."

"But," said Franz to the count, "with this theory, which renders you at
once judge and executioner of your own cause, it would be difficult to
adopt a course that would forever prevent your falling under the power
of the law. Hatred is blind, rage carries you away; and he who pours out
vengeance runs the risk of tasting a bitter draught."

"Yes, if he be poor and inexperienced, not if he be rich and skilful;
besides, the worst that could happen to him would be the punishment of
which we have already spoken, and which the philanthropic French
Revolution has substituted for being torn to pieces by horses or broken
on the wheel. What matters this punishment, as long as he is avenged? On
my word, I almost regret that in all probability this miserable Peppino
will not be beheaded, as you might have had an opportunity then of
seeing how short a time the punishment lasts, and whether it is worth
even mentioning; but, really this is a most singular conversation for
the Carnival, gentlemen; how did it arise? Ah, I recollect, you asked
for a place at my window; you shall have it; but let us first sit down
to table, for here comes the servant to inform us that breakfast is
ready." As he spoke, a servant opened one of the four doors of the
apartment, saying--"_Al suo commodo!_" The two young men arose and
entered the breakfast-room.

During the meal, which was excellent, and admirably served, Franz looked
repeatedly at Albert, in order to observe the impressions which he
doubted not had been made on him by the words of their entertainer; but
whether with his usual carelessness he had paid but little attention to
him, whether the explanation of the Count of Monte Cristo with regard to
duelling had satisfied him, or whether the events which Franz knew of
had had their effect on him alone, he remarked that his companion did
not pay the least regard to them, but on the contrary ate like a man who
for the last four or five months had been condemned to partake of
Italian cookery--that is, the worst in the world. As for the count, he
just touched the dishes; he seemed to fulfil the duties of a host by
sitting down with his guests, and awaited their departure to be served
with some strange or more delicate food. This brought back to Franz, in
spite of himself, the recollection of the terror with which the count
had inspired the Countess G----, and her firm conviction that the man in
the opposite box was a vampire. At the end of the breakfast Franz took
out his watch. "Well," said the count, "what are you doing?"

"You must excuse us, count," returned Franz, "but we have still much to
do."

"What may that be?"

"We have no masks, and it is absolutely necessary to procure them."

"Do not concern yourself about that; we have, I think, a private room in
the Piazza del Popolo; I will have whatever costumes you choose brought
to us, and you can dress there."

"After the execution?" cried Franz.

"Before or after, whichever you please."

"Opposite the scaffold?"

"The scaffold forms part of the _fête_."

"Count, I have reflected on the matter," said Franz, "I thank you for
your courtesy, but I shall content myself with accepting a place in your
carriage and at your window at the Rospoli Palace, and I leave you at
liberty to dispose of my place at the Piazza del Popolo."

"But I warn you, you will lose a very curious sight," returned the
count.

"You will describe it to me," replied Franz, "and the recital from your
lips will make as great an impression on me as if I had witnessed it. I
have more than once intended witnessing an execution, but I have never
been able to make up my mind; and you, Albert?"

"I," replied the viscount,--"I saw Castaing executed, but I think I was
rather intoxicated that day, for I had quitted college the same morning,
and we had passed the previous night at a tavern."

"Besides, it is no reason because you have not seen an execution at
Paris, that you should not see one anywhere else; when you travel, it is
to see everything. Think what a figure you will make when you are asked,
'How do they execute at Rome?' and you reply, 'I do not know!' And,
besides, they say that the culprit is an infamous scoundrel, who killed
with a log of wood a worthy canon who had brought him up like his own
son. _Diable!_ when a churchman is killed, it should be with a different
weapon than a log, especially when he has behaved like a father. If you
went to Spain, would you not see the bull-fight? Well, suppose it is a
bull-fight you are going to see? Recollect the ancient Romans of the
Circus, and the sports where they killed three hundred lions and a
hundred men. Think of the eighty thousand applauding spectators, the
sage matrons who took their daughters, and the charming Vestals who made
with the thumb of their white hands the fatal sign that said, 'Come,
despatch the dying.'"

"Shall you go, then, Albert?" asked Franz.

"_Ma foi_, yes; like you, I hesitated, but the count's eloquence decides
me."

"Let us go, then," said Franz, "since you wish it; but on our way to the
Piazza del Popolo, I wish to pass through the Corso. Is this possible,
count?"

"On foot, yes, in a carriage, no."

"I will go on foot, then."

"Is it important that you should go that way?"

"Yes, there is something I wish to see."

"Well, we will go by the Corso. We will send the carriage to wait for us
on the Piazza del Popolo, by the Via del Babuino, for I shall be glad to
pass, myself, through the Corso, to see if some orders I have given have
been executed."

"Excellency," said a servant, opening the door, "a man in the dress of a
penitent wishes to speak to you."

"Ah, yes" returned the count, "I know who he is, gentlemen; will you
return to the salon? you will find good cigars on the centre table. I
will be with you directly." The young men rose and returned into the
salon, while the count, again apologizing, left by another door. Albert,
who was a great smoker, and who had considered it no small sacrifice to
be deprived of the cigars of the Café de Paris, approached the table,
and uttered a cry of joy at perceiving some veritable _puros_.

"Well," asked Franz, "what think you of the Count of Monte Cristo?"

"What do I think?" said Albert, evidently surprised at such a question
from his companion; "I think he is a delightful fellow, who does the
honors of his table admirably; who has travelled much, read much, is,
like Brutus, of the Stoic school, and moreover," added he, sending a
volume of smoke up towards the ceiling, "that he has excellent cigars."
Such was Albert's opinion of the count, and as Franz well knew that
Albert professed never to form an opinion except upon long reflection,
he made no attempt to change it. "But," said he, "did you observe one
very singular thing?"

"What?"

"How attentively he looked at you."

"At me?"

"Yes."

Albert reflected. "Ah," replied he, sighing, "that is not very
surprising; I have been more than a year absent from Paris, and my
clothes are of a most antiquated cut; the count takes me for a
provincial. The first opportunity you have, undeceive him, I beg, and
tell him I am nothing of the kind." Franz smiled; an instant after the
count entered.

"I am now quite at your service, gentlemen," said he. "The carriage is
going one way to the Piazza del Popolo, and we will go another; and, if
you please, by the Corso. Take some more of these cigars, M. de
Morcerf."

"With all my heart," returned Albert; "Italian cigars are horrible. When
you come to Paris, I will return all this."

"I will not refuse; I intend going there soon, and since you allow me, I
will pay you a visit. Come, we have not any time to lose, it is half-
past twelve--let us set off." All three descended; the coachman received
his master's orders, and drove down the Via del Babuino. While the three
gentlemen walked along the Piazza di Spagna and the Via Frattina, which
led directly between the Fiano and Rospoli palaces, Franz's attention
was directed towards the windows of that last palace, for he had not
forgotten the signal agreed upon between the man in the mantle and the
Transtevere peasant. "Which are your windows?" asked he of the count,
with as much indifference as he could assume. "The three last," returned
he, with a negligence evidently unaffected, for he could not imagine
with what intention the question was put. Franz glanced rapidly towards
the three windows. The side windows were hung with yellow damask, and
the centre one with white damask and a red cross. The man in the mantle
had kept his promise to the Transteverin, and there could now be no
doubt that he was the count. The three windows were still untenanted.
Preparations were making on every side; chairs were placed, scaffolds
were raised, and windows were hung with flags. The masks could not
appear; the carriages could not move about; but the masks were visible
behind the windows, the carriages, and the doors.

Franz, Albert, and the count continued to descend the Corso. As they
approached the Piazza del Popolo, the crowd became more dense, and above
