
"Yes."

"And where does he reside?"

"On the sea."

"What country does he come from?"

"I do not know."

"Have you ever seen him?"

"Sometimes."

"What sort of a man is he?"

"Your excellency will judge for yourself."

"Where will he receive me?"

"No doubt in the subterranean palace Gaetano told you of."

"Have you never had the curiosity, when you have landed and found this
island deserted, to seek for this enchanted palace?"

"Oh, yes, more than once, but always in vain; we examined the grotto all
over, but we never could find the slightest trace of any opening; they
say that the door is not opened by a key, but a magic word."

"Decidedly," muttered Franz, "this is an Arabian Nights' adventure."

"His excellency waits for you," said a voice, which he recognized as
that of the sentinel. He was accompanied by two of the yacht's crew.
Franz drew his handkerchief from his pocket, and presented it to the man
who had spoken to him. Without uttering a word, they bandaged his eyes
with a care that showed their apprehensions of his committing some
indiscretion. Afterwards he was made to promise that he would not make
the least attempt to raise the bandage. He promised.

Then his two guides took his arms, and he went on, guided by them, and
preceded by the sentinel. After going about thirty paces, he smelt the
appetizing odor of the kid that was roasting, and knew thus that he was
passing the bivouac; they then led him on about fifty paces farther,
evidently advancing towards that part of the shore where they would not
allow Gaetano to go--a refusal he could now comprehend. Presently, by a
change in the atmosphere, he knew that they were entering a cave; after
going on for a few seconds more he heard a crackling, and it seemed to
him as though the atmosphere again changed, and became balmy and
perfumed. At length his feet touched on a thick and soft carpet, and his
guides let go their hold of him. There was a moment's silence, and then
a voice, in excellent French, although, with a foreign accent, said,

"Welcome, sir. I beg you will remove your bandage." It may be supposed,
then, Franz did not wait for a repetition of this permission, but took
off the handkerchief, and found himself in the presence of a man from
thirty-eight to forty years of age, dressed in a Tunisian costume, that
is to say, a red cap with a long blue silk tassel, a vest of black cloth
embroidered with gold, pantaloons of deep red, large and full gaiters of
the same color, embroidered with gold like the vest, and yellow
slippers; he had a splendid cashmere round his waist, and a small sharp
and crooked cangiar was passed through his girdle.

Although of a paleness that was almost livid, this man had a remarkably
handsome face; his eyes were penetrating and sparkling; his nose, quite
straight, and projecting direct from the brow, was of the pure Greek
type, while his teeth, as white as pearls, were set off to admiration by
the black moustache that encircled them.

His pallor was so peculiar, that it seemed to pertain to one who had
been long entombed, and who was incapable of resuming the healthy glow
and hue of life. He was not particularly tall, but extremely well made,
and, like the men of the south, had small hands and feet. But what
astonished Franz, who had treated Gaetano's description as a fable, was
the splendor of the apartment in which he found himself.

The entire chamber was lined with crimson brocade, worked with flowers
of gold. In a recess was a kind of divan, surmounted with a stand of
Arabian swords in silver scabbards, and the handles resplendent with
gems; from the ceiling hung a lamp of Venetian glass, of beautiful shape
and color, while the feet rested on a Turkey carpet, in which they sunk
to the instep; tapestry hung before the door by which Franz had entered,
and also in front of another door, leading into a second apartment which
seemed to be brilliantly illuminated.

The host gave Franz time to recover from his surprise, and, moreover,
returned look for look, not even taking his eyes off him.

"Sir," he said, after a pause, "a thousand excuses for the precaution
taken in your introduction hither; but as, during the greater portion of
the year, this island is deserted, if the secret of this abode were
discovered. I should doubtless, find on my return my temporary
retirement in a state of great disorder, which would be exceedingly
annoying, not for the loss it occasioned me, but because I should not
have the certainty I now possess of separating myself from all the rest
of mankind at pleasure. Let me now endeavor to make you forget this
temporary unpleasantness, and offer you what no doubt you did not expect
to find here--that is to say, a tolerable supper and pretty comfortable
beds."

"_Ma foi_, my dear sir," replied Franz, "make no apologies. I have
always observed that they bandage people's eyes who penetrate enchanted
palaces, for instance, those of Raoul in the _Huguenots_, and really I
have nothing to complain of, for what I see makes me think of the
wonders of the _Arabian Nights_."


"Alas! I may say with Lucullus, if I could have anticipated the honor of
your visit, I would have prepared for it. But such as is my hermitage,
it is at your disposal; such as is my supper, it is yours to share, if
you will. Ali, is the supper ready?"

At this moment the tapestry moved aside, and a Nubian, black as ebony,
and dressed in a plain white tunic, made a sign to his master that all
was prepared in the dining-room.

"Now," said the unknown to Franz, "I do not know if you are of my
opinion, but I think nothing is more annoying than to remain two or
three hours together without knowing by name or appellation how to
address one another. Pray observe, that I too much respect the laws of
hospitality to ask your name or title. I only request you to give me one
by which I may have the pleasure of addressing you. As for myself, that
I may put you at your ease, I tell you that I am generally called
'Sinbad the Sailor.'"

"And I," replied Franz, "will tell you, as I only require his wonderful
lamp to make me precisely like Aladdin, that I see no reason why at this
moment I should not be called Aladdin. That will keep us from going away
from the East whither I am tempted to think I have been conveyed by some
good genius."

"Well, then, Signor Aladdin," replied the singular Amphitryon, "you
heard our repast announced, will you now take the trouble to enter the
dining-room, your humble servant going first to show the way?"

At these words, moving aside the tapestry, Sinbad preceded his guest.
Franz now looked upon another scene of enchantment; the table was
splendidly covered, and once convinced of this important point he cast
his eyes around him. The dining-room was scarcely less striking than the
room he had just left; it was entirely of marble, with antique bas-
reliefs of priceless value; and at the four corners of this apartment,
which was oblong, were four magnificent statues, having baskets in their
hands. These baskets contained four pyramids of most splendid fruit;
there were Sicily pine-apples, pomegranates from Malaga, oranges from
the Balearic Isles, peaches from France, and dates from Tunis. The
supper consisted of a roast pheasant garnished with Corsican blackbirds;
a boar's ham with jelly, a quarter of a kid with tartar sauce, a
glorious turbot, and a gigantic lobster. Between these large dishes were
smaller ones containing various dainties. The dishes were of silver, and
the plates of Japanese china.

Franz rubbed his eyes in order to assure himself that this was not a
dream. Ali alone was present to wait at table, and acquitted himself so
admirably, that the guest complimented his host thereupon.

"Yes," replied he, while he did the honors of the supper with much ease
and grace--"yes, he is a poor devil who is much devoted to me, and does
all he can to prove it. He remembers that I saved his life, and as he
has a regard for his head, he feels some gratitude towards me for having
kept it on his shoulders." Ali approached his master, took his hand, and
kissed it.

"Would it be impertinent, Signor Sinbad," said Franz, "to ask you the
particulars of this kindness?"


"Oh, they are simple enough," replied the host. "It seems the fellow had
been caught wandering nearer to the harem of the Bey of Tunis than
etiquette permits to one of his color, and he was condemned by the Bey
to have his tongue cut out, and his hand and head cut off; the tongue
the first day, the hand the second, and the head the third. I always had
a desire to have a mute in my service, so learning the day his tongue
was cut out, I went to the Bey, and proposed to give him for Ali a
splendid double-barreled gun, which I knew he was very desirous of
having. He hesitated a moment, he was so very desirous to complete the
poor devil's punishment. But when I added to the gun an English cutlass
with which I had shivered his highness's yataghan to pieces, the Bey
yielded, and agreed to forgive the hand and head, but on condition that
the poor fellow never again set foot in Tunis. This was a useless clause
in the bargain, for whenever the coward sees the first glimpse of the
shores of Africa, he runs down below, and can only be induced to appear
again when we are out of sight of that quarter of the globe."

Franz remained a moment silent and pensive, hardly knowing what to think
of the half-kindness, half-cruelty, with which his host related the
brief narrative.

"And like the celebrated sailor whose name you have assumed," he said,
by way of changing the conversation, "you pass your life in travelling?"

"Yes. I made a vow at a time when I little thought I should ever be able
to accomplish it," said the unknown with a singular smile; "and I made
some others also which I hope I may fulfil in due season." Although
Sinbad pronounced these words with much calmness, his eyes gave forth
gleams of extraordinary ferocity.

"You have suffered a great deal, sir?" said Franz inquiringly.

Sinbad started and looked fixedly at him, as he replied, "What makes you
suppose so?"
