do with the physical superiority we accord to certain nations. The Turks
used to be so picturesque with their long and flowing robes, but are
they not now hideous with their blue frocks buttoned up to the chin, and
their red caps, which make them look like a bottle of wine with a red
seal? Franz complimented Albert, who looked at himself in the glass with
an unequivocal smile of satisfaction. They were thus engaged when the
Count of Monte Cristo entered.


"Gentlemen," said he, "although a companion is agreeable, perfect
freedom is sometimes still more agreeable. I come to say that today, and
for the remainder of the Carnival, I leave the carriage entirely at your
disposal. The host will tell you I have three or four more, so that you
will not inconvenience me in any way. Make use of it, I pray you, for
your pleasure or your business."

The young men wished to decline, but they could find no good reason for
refusing an offer which was so agreeable to them. The Count of Monte
Cristo remained a quarter of an hour with them, conversing on all
subjects with the greatest ease. He was, as we have already said,
perfectly well acquainted with the literature of all countries. A glance
at the walls of his salon proved to Franz and Albert that he was a
connoisseur of pictures. A few words he let fall showed them that he was
no stranger to the sciences, and he seemed much occupied with chemistry.
The two friends did not venture to return the count the breakfast he had
given them; it would have been too absurd to offer him in exchange for
his excellent table the very inferior one of Signor Pastrini. They told
him so frankly, and he received their excuses with the air of a man who
appreciated their delicacy. Albert was charmed with the count's manners,
and he was only prevented from recognizing him for a perfect gentleman
by reason of his varied knowledge.

The permission to do what he liked with the carriage pleased him above
all, for the fair peasants had appeared in a most elegant carriage the
preceding evening, and Albert was not sorry to be upon an equal footing
with them. At half-past one they descended, the coachman and footman had
put on their livery over their disguises, which gave them a more
ridiculous appearance than ever, and which gained them the applause of
Franz and Albert. Albert had fastened the faded bunch of violets to his
button-hole. At the first sound of the bell they hastened into the Corso
by the Via Vittoria.

At the second turn, a bunch of fresh violets, thrown from a carriage
filled with harlequins, indicated to Albert that, like himself and his
friend, the peasants had changed their costume, also; and whether it was
the result of chance, or whether a similar feeling had possessed them
both, while he had changed his costume they had assumed his.

Albert placed the fresh bouquet in his button-hole, but he kept the
faded one in his hand; and when he again met the calash, he raised it to
his lips, an action which seemed greatly to amuse not only the fair lady
who had thrown it, but her joyous companions also. The day was as gay as
the preceding one, perhaps even more animated and noisy; the count
appeared for an instant at his window, but when they again passed he had
disappeared. It is almost needless to say that the flirtation between
Albert and the fair peasant continued all day.

In the evening, on his return, Franz found a letter from the embassy,
informing him that he would have the honor of being received by his
holiness the next day. At each previous visit he had made to Rome, he
had solicited and obtained the same favor; and incited as much by a
religious feeling as by gratitude, he was unwilling to quit the capital
of the Christian world without laying his respectful homage at the feet
of one of St. Peter's successors who has set the rare example of all the
virtues. He did not then think of the Carnival, for in spite of his
condescension and touching kindness, one cannot incline one's self
without awe before the venerable and noble old man called Gregory XVI.

On his return from the Vatican, Franz carefully avoided the Corso; he
brought away with him a treasure of pious thoughts, to which the mad
gayety of the maskers would have been profanation.

At ten minutes past five Albert entered overjoyed. The harlequin had
reassumed her peasant's costume, and as she passed she raised her mask.
She was charming. Franz congratulated Albert, who received his
congratulations with the air of a man conscious that they are merited.
He had recognized by certain unmistakable signs, that his fair
_incognita_ belonged to the aristocracy. He had made up his mind to
write to her the next day.

Franz remarked, while he gave these details, that Albert seemed to have
something to ask of him, but that he was unwilling to ask it. He
insisted upon it, declaring beforehand that he was willing to make any
sacrifice the other wished.

Albert let himself be pressed just as long as friendship required, and
then avowed to Franz that he would do him a great favor by allowing him
to occupy the carriage alone the next day. Albert attributed to Franz's
absence the extreme kindness of the fair peasant in raising her mask.
Franz was not sufficiently egotistical to stop Albert in the middle of
an adventure that promised to prove so agreeable to his curiosity and so
flattering to his vanity. He felt assured that the perfect indiscretion
of his friend would duly inform him of all that happened; and as, during
three years that he had travelled all over Italy, a similar piece of
good fortune had never fallen to his share, Franz was by no means sorry
to learn how to act on such an occasion. He therefore promised Albert
that he would content himself the morrow with witnessing the Carnival
from the windows of the Rospoli Palace.

The next morning he saw Albert pass and repass, holding an enormous
bouquet, which he doubtless meant to make the bearer of his amorous
epistle. This belief was changed into certainty when Franz saw the
bouquet (conspicuous by a circle of white camellias) in the hand of a
charming harlequin dressed in rose-colored satin.

The evening was no longer joy, but delirium. Albert nothing doubted but
that the fair unknown would reply in the same manner. Franz anticipated
his wishes by saying that the noise fatigued him, and that he should
pass the next day in writing and looking over his journal. Albert was
not deceived, for the next evening Franz saw him enter triumphantly
shaking a folded paper which he held by one corner.

"Well," said he, "was I mistaken?"

"She has answered you!" cried Franz.

"Read." This word was pronounced in a manner impossible to describe.
Franz took the letter, and read:

"Tuesday evening, at seven o'clock, descend from your carriage opposite
the Via dei Pontefici, and follow the Roman peasant who snatches your
torch from you. When you arrive at the first step of the church of San
Giacomo, be sure to fasten a knot of rose-colored ribbons to the
shoulder of your harlequin costume, in order that you may be recognized.
Until then you will not see me. --Constancy and Discretion."

"Well," asked he, when Franz had finished, "what do you think of that?"

"I think that the adventure is assuming a very agreeable appearance."

"I think so, also," replied Albert; "and I very much fear you will go
alone to the Duke of Bracciano's ball." Franz and Albert had received
that morning an invitation from the celebrated Roman banker.

"Take care, Albert," said Franz. "All the nobility of Rome will be
present, and if your fair _incognita_ belong to the higher class of
society, she must go there."

"Whether she goes there or not, my opinion is still the same," returned
Albert. "You have read the letter?"

"Yes."

"You know how imperfectly the women of the _mezzo cito_ are educated in
Italy?" (This is the name of the lower class.)

"Yes."

"Well, read the letter again. Look at the writing, and find if you can,
any blemish in the language or orthography." (The writing was, in
reality, charming, and the orthography irreproachable.) "You are born to
good fortune," said Franz, as he returned the letter.

"Laugh as much as you will," replied Albert, "I am in love."

"You alarm me," cried Franz. "I see that I shall not only go alone to
the Duke of Bracciano's, but also return to Florence alone."

"If my unknown be as amiable as she is beautiful," said Albert, "I shall
fix myself at Rome for six weeks, at least. I adore Rome, and I have
always had a great taste for archæology."


"Come, two or three more such adventures, and I do not despair of seeing
you a member of the Academy." Doubtless Albert was about to discuss
seriously his right to the academic chair when they were informed that
dinner was ready. Albert's love had not taken away his appetite. He
hastened with Franz to seat himself, free to recommence the discussion
after dinner. After dinner, the Count of Monte Cristo was announced.
They had not seen him for two days. Signor Pastrini informed them that
business had called him to Civita Vecchia. He had started the previous
evening, and had only returned an hour since. He was charming. Whether
he kept a watch over himself, or whether by accident he did not sound
the acrimonious chords that in other circumstances had been touched, he
was tonight like everybody else.

The man was an enigma to Franz. The count must feel sure that Franz
recognized him; and yet he had not let fall a single word indicating any
previous acquaintance between them. On his side, however great Franz's
desire was to allude to their former interview, the fear of being
disagreeable to the man who had loaded him and his friend with kindness
prevented him from mentioning it.

The count had learned that the two friends had sent to secure a box at
the Argentina Theatre, and were told they were all let. In consequence,
he brought them the key of his own--at least such was the apparent
motive of his visit. Franz and Albert made some difficulty, alleging
their fear of depriving him of it; but the count replied that, as he was
going to the Palli Theatre, the box at the Argentina Theatre would be
lost if they did not profit by it. This assurance determined the two
friends to accept it.

Franz had by degrees become accustomed to the count's pallor, which had
so forcibly struck him at their first meeting. He could not refrain from
admiring the severe beauty of his features, the only defect, or rather
the principal quality of which was the pallor. Truly, a Byronic hero!
Franz could not, we will not say see him, but even think of him without
imagining his stern head upon Manfred's shoulders, or beneath Lara's
helmet. His forehead was marked with the line that indicates the
constant presence of bitter thoughts; he had the fiery eyes that seem to
