In the bitterness of his remorse he swore that he would never leave
the kennel until his children came back. Of course this was a pity; but
whatever Mr. Darling did he had to do in excess, otherwise he soon gave
up doing it. And there never was a more humble man than the once proud
George Darling, as he sat in the kennel of an evening talking with his
wife of their children and all their pretty ways.

Very touching was his deference to Nana. He would not let her come into
the kennel, but on all other matters he followed her wishes implicitly.

Every morning the kennel was carried with Mr. Darling in it to a cab,
which conveyed him to his office, and he returned home in the same way
at six. Something of the strength of character of the man will be seen
if we remember how sensitive he was to the opinion of neighbours: this
man whose every movement now attracted surprised attention. Inwardly he
must have suffered torture; but he preserved a calm exterior even when
the young criticised his little home, and he always lifted his hat
courteously to any lady who looked inside.

It may have been Quixotic, but it was magnificent. Soon the inward
meaning of it leaked out, and the great heart of the public was touched.
Crowds followed the cab, cheering it lustily; charming girls scaled it
to get his autograph; interviews appeared in the better class of papers,
and society invited him to dinner and added, "Do come in the kennel."

On that eventful Thursday week, Mrs. Darling was in the night-nursery
awaiting George's return home; a very sad-eyed woman. Now that we look
at her closely and remember the gaiety of her in the old days, all gone
now just because she has lost her babes, I find I won't be able to say
nasty things about her after all. If she was too fond of her rubbishy
children, she couldn't help it. Look at her in her chair, where she has
fallen asleep. The corner of her mouth, where one looks first, is almost
withered up. Her hand moves restlessly on her breast as if she had a
pain there. Some like Peter best, and some like Wendy best, but I like
her best. Suppose, to make her happy, we whisper to her in her sleep
that the brats are coming back. They are really within two miles of the
window now, and flying strong, but all we need whisper is that they are
on the way. Let's.

It is a pity we did it, for she has started up, calling their names; and
there is no one in the room but Nana.

"O Nana, I dreamt my dear ones had come back."

Nana had filmy eyes, but all she could do was put her paw gently on her
mistress's lap; and they were sitting together thus when the kennel was
brought back. As Mr. Darling puts his head out to kiss his wife, we see
that his face is more worn than of yore, but has a softer expression.

He gave his hat to Liza, who took it scornfully; for she had no
imagination, and was quite incapable of understanding the motives of
such a man. Outside, the crowd who had accompanied the cab home were
still cheering, and he was naturally not unmoved.

"Listen to them," he said; "it is very gratifying."

"Lots of little boys," sneered Liza.

"There were several adults to-day," he assured her with a faint flush;
but when she tossed her head he had not a word of reproof for her.
Social success had not spoilt him; it had made him sweeter. For some
time he sat with his head out of the kennel, talking with Mrs. Darling
of this success, and pressing her hand reassuringly when she said she
hoped his head would not be turned by it.

"But if I had been a weak man," he said. "Good heavens, if I had been a
weak man!"

"And, George," she said timidly, "you are as full of remorse as ever,
aren't you?"

"Full of remorse as ever, dearest! See my punishment: living in a
kennel."

"But it is punishment, isn't it, George? You are sure you are not
enjoying it?"

"My love!"

You may be sure she begged his pardon; and then, feeling drowsy, he
curled round in the kennel.

"Won't you play me to sleep," he asked, "on the nursery piano?" and as
she was crossing to the day-nursery he added thoughtlessly, "And shut
that window. I feel a draught."

"O George, never ask me to do that. The window must always be left open
for them, always, always."

Now it was his turn to beg her pardon; and she went into the day-nursery
and played, and soon he was asleep; and while he slept, Wendy and John
and Michael flew into the room.

Oh no. We have written it so, because that was the charming arrangement
planned by them before we left the ship; but something must have
happened since then, for it is not they who have flown in, it is Peter
and Tinker Bell.

Peter's first words tell all.

"Quick Tink," he whispered, "close the window; bar it! That's right. Now
you and I must get away by the door; and when Wendy comes she will think
her mother has barred her out; and she will have to go back with me."

Now I understand what had hitherto puzzled me, why when Peter had
exterminated the pirates he did not return to the island and leave Tink
to escort the children to the mainland. This trick had been in his head
all the time.

Instead of feeling that he was behaving badly he danced with glee; then
he peeped into the day-nursery to see who was playing. He whispered to
Tink, "It's Wendy's mother! She is a pretty lady, but not so pretty as
my mother. Her mouth is full of thimbles, but not so full as my mother's
was."

Of course he knew nothing whatever about his mother; but he sometimes
bragged about her.

He did not know the tune, which was "Home, Sweet Home," but he knew it
was saying, "Come back, Wendy, Wendy, Wendy"; and he cried exultantly,
"You will never see Wendy again, lady, for the window is barred!"

He peeped in again to see why the music had stopped, and now he saw
that Mrs. Darling had laid her head on the box, and that two tears were
sitting on her eyes.

"She wants me to unbar the window," thought Peter, "but I won't, not I!"

He peeped again, and the tears were still there, or another two had
taken their place.

"She's awfully fond of Wendy," he said to himself. He was angry with her
now for not seeing why she could not have Wendy.

The reason was so simple: "I'm fond of her too. We can't both have her,
lady."

But the lady would not make the best of it, and he was unhappy. He
ceased to look at her, but even then she would not let go of him. He
skipped about and made funny faces, but when he stopped it was just as
if she were inside him, knocking.

"Oh, all right," he said at last, and gulped. Then he unbarred the
window. "Come on, Tink," he cried, with a frightful sneer at the laws of
nature; "we don't want any silly mothers;" and he flew away.

Thus Wendy and John and Michael found the window open for them after
all, which of course was more than they deserved. They alighted on the
floor, quite unashamed of themselves, and the youngest one had already
forgotten his home.

"John," he said, looking around him doubtfully, "I think I have been
here before."

"Of course you have, you silly. There is your old bed."

"So it is," Michael said, but not with much conviction.

"I say," cried John, "the kennel!" and he dashed across to look into it.

"Perhaps Nana is inside it," Wendy said.

But John whistled. "Hullo," he said, "there's a man inside it."

"It's father!" exclaimed Wendy.

"Let me see father," Michael begged eagerly, and he took a good look.
"He is not so big as the pirate I killed," he said with such frank
disappointment that I am glad Mr. Darling was asleep; it would have been
sad if those had been the first words he heard his little Michael say.

Wendy and John had been taken aback somewhat at finding their father in
the kennel.

"Surely," said John, like one who had lost faith in his memory, "he used
not to sleep in the kennel?"

"John," Wendy said falteringly, "perhaps we don't remember the old life
as well as we thought we did."

A chill fell upon them; and serve them right.

"It is very careless of mother," said that young scoundrel John, "not to
be here when we come back."

It was then that Mrs. Darling began playing again.

"It's mother!" cried Wendy, peeping.

"So it is!" said John.

"Then are you not really our mother, Wendy?" asked Michael, who was
surely sleepy.

"Oh dear!" exclaimed Wendy, with her first real twinge of remorse [for
having gone], "it was quite time we came back."

"Let us creep in," John suggested, "and put our hands over her eyes."

But Wendy, who saw that they must break the joyous news more gently, had
