King."

He hurried away, leaving the prisoner in the grip of the halberdiers.

"Now is my evil luck ended at last," muttered Hendon, "for I shall
dangle at a rope's end for a certainty, by reason of that bit of
writing.  And what will become of my poor lad!--ah, only the good God
knoweth."

By-and-by he saw the officer coming again, in a great hurry; so he
plucked his courage together, purposing to meet his trouble as became a
man.  The officer ordered the men to loose the prisoner and return his
sword to him; then bowed respectfully, and said--

"Please you, sir, to follow me."

Hendon followed, saying to himself, "An' I were not travelling to death
and judgment, and so must needs economise in sin, I would throttle this
knave for his mock courtesy."

The two traversed a populous court, and arrived at the grand entrance of
the palace, where the officer, with another bow, delivered Hendon into
the hands of a gorgeous official, who received him with profound respect
and led him forward through a great hall, lined on both sides with rows
of splendid flunkeys (who made reverential obeisance as the two passed
along, but fell into death-throes of silent laughter at our stately
scarecrow the moment his back was turned), and up a broad staircase,
among flocks of fine folk, and finally conducted him into a vast room,
clove a passage for him through the assembled nobility of England, then
made a bow, reminded him to take his hat off, and left him standing in
the middle of the room, a mark for all eyes, for plenty of indignant
frowns, and for a sufficiency of amused and derisive smiles.

Miles Hendon was entirely bewildered.  There sat the young King, under
a canopy of state, five steps away, with his head bent down and aside,
speaking with a sort of human bird of paradise--a duke, maybe.  Hendon
observed to himself that it was hard enough to be sentenced to death
in the full vigour of life, without having this peculiarly public
humiliation added.  He wished the King would hurry about it--some of the
gaudy people near by were becoming pretty offensive.  At this moment
the King raised his head slightly, and Hendon caught a good view of his
face. The sight nearly took his breath away!--He stood gazing at the
fair young face like one transfixed; then presently ejaculated--

"Lo, the Lord of the Kingdom of Dreams and Shadows on his throne!"

He muttered some broken sentences, still gazing and marvelling; then
turned his eyes around and about, scanning the gorgeous throng and the
splendid saloon, murmuring, "But these are _real_--verily these are
_real_--surely it is not a dream."

He stared at the King again--and thought, "_Is_ it a dream . . . or _is_
he the veritable Sovereign of England, and not the friendless poor Tom
o' Bedlam I took him for--who shall solve me this riddle?"

A sudden idea flashed in his eye, and he strode to the wall, gathered up
a chair, brought it back, planted it on the floor, and sat down in it!

A buzz of indignation broke out, a rough hand was laid upon him and a
voice exclaimed--

"Up, thou mannerless clown! would'st sit in the presence of the King?"

The disturbance attracted his Majesty's attention, who stretched forth
his hand and cried out--

"Touch him not, it is his right!"

The throng fell back, stupefied.  The King went on--

"Learn ye all, ladies, lords, and gentlemen, that this is my trusty and
well-beloved servant, Miles Hendon, who interposed his good sword and
saved his prince from bodily harm and possible death--and for this he is
a knight, by the King's voice.  Also learn, that for a higher service,
in that he saved his sovereign stripes and shame, taking these upon
himself, he is a peer of England, Earl of Kent, and shall have gold
and lands meet for the dignity.  More--the privilege which he hath just
exercised is his by royal grant; for we have ordained that the chiefs
of his line shall have and hold the right to sit in the presence of the
Majesty of England henceforth, age after age, so long as the crown shall
endure.  Molest him not."

Two persons, who, through delay, had only arrived from the country
during this morning, and had now been in this room only five minutes,
stood listening to these words and looking at the King, then at the
scarecrow, then at the King again, in a sort of torpid bewilderment.
 These were Sir Hugh and the Lady Edith.  But the new Earl did not
see them.  He was still staring at the monarch, in a dazed way, and
muttering--

"Oh, body o' me!  _this_ my pauper!  This my lunatic!  This is he whom
_I_ would show what grandeur was, in my house of seventy rooms and
seven-and-twenty servants!  This is he who had never known aught but
rags for raiment, kicks for comfort, and offal for diet!  This is he
whom _I_ adopted and would make respectable! Would God I had a bag to
hide my head in!"

Then his manners suddenly came back to him, and he dropped upon his
knees, with his hands between the King's, and swore allegiance and did
homage for his lands and titles.  Then he rose and stood respectfully
aside, a mark still for all eyes--and much envy, too.

Now the King discovered Sir Hugh, and spoke out with wrathful voice and
kindling eye--

"Strip this robber of his false show and stolen estates, and put him
under lock and key till I have need of him."

The late Sir Hugh was led away.

There was a stir at the other end of the room, now; the assemblage fell
apart, and Tom Canty, quaintly but richly clothed, marched down, between
these living walls, preceded by an usher.  He knelt before the King, who
said--

"I have learned the story of these past few weeks, and am well pleased
with thee.  Thou hast governed the realm with right royal gentleness and
mercy.  Thou hast found thy mother and thy sisters again?  Good; they
shall be cared for--and thy father shall hang, if thou desire it and the
law consent.  Know, all ye that hear my voice, that from this day, they
that abide in the shelter of Christ's Hospital and share the King's
bounty shall have their minds and hearts fed, as well as their baser
parts; and this boy shall dwell there, and hold the chief place in its
honourable body of governors, during life.  And for that he hath been
a king, it is meet that other than common observance shall be his due;
wherefore note this his dress of state, for by it he shall be known, and
none shall copy it; and wheresoever he shall come, it shall remind the
people that he hath been royal, in his time, and none shall deny him his
due of reverence or fail to give him salutation.  He hath the throne's
protection, he hath the crown's support, he shall be known and called by
the honourable title of the King's Ward."

The proud and happy Tom Canty rose and kissed the King's hand, and was
conducted from the presence.  He did not waste any time, but flew to his
mother, to tell her and Nan and Bet all about it and get them to help
him enjoy the great news. {1}

Conclusion. Justice and retribution.

When the mysteries were all cleared up, it came out, by confession of
Hugh Hendon, that his wife had repudiated Miles by his command, that
day at Hendon Hall--a command assisted and supported by the perfectly
trustworthy promise that if she did not deny that he was Miles Hendon,
and stand firmly to it, he would have her life; whereupon she said,
"Take it!"--she did not value it--and she would not repudiate
Miles; then the husband said he would spare her life but have Miles
assassinated!  This was a different matter; so she gave her word and
kept it.

Hugh was not prosecuted for his threats or for stealing his brother's
estates and title, because the wife and brother would not testify
against him--and the former would not have been allowed to do it, even
if she had wanted to.  Hugh deserted his wife and went over to the
continent, where he presently died; and by-and-by the Earl of Kent
married his relict. There were grand times and rejoicings at Hendon
village when the couple paid their first visit to the Hall.

Tom Canty's father was never heard of again.

The King sought out the farmer who had been branded and sold as a slave,
and reclaimed him from his evil life with the Ruffler's gang, and put
him in the way of a comfortable livelihood.

He also took that old lawyer out of prison and remitted his fine. He
provided good homes for the daughters of the two Baptist women whom he
saw burned at the stake, and roundly punished the official who laid the
undeserved stripes upon Miles Hendon's back.

He saved from the gallows the boy who had captured the stray falcon, and
also the woman who had stolen a remnant of cloth from a weaver; but he
was too late to save the man who had been convicted of killing a deer in
the royal forest.

He showed favour to the justice who had pitied him when he was supposed
to have stolen a pig, and he had the gratification of seeing him grow in
the public esteem and become a great and honoured man.

As long as the King lived he was fond of telling the story of his
adventures, all through, from the hour that the sentinel cuffed him
away from the palace gate till the final midnight when he deftly mixed
himself into a gang of hurrying workmen and so slipped into the Abbey
and climbed up and hid himself in the Confessor's tomb, and then slept
so long, next day, that he came within one of missing the Coronation
altogether.  He said that the frequent rehearsing of the precious lesson
kept him strong in his purpose to make its teachings yield benefits to
his people; and so, whilst his life was spared he should continue to
tell the story, and thus keep its sorrowful spectacles fresh in his
memory and the springs of pity replenished in his heart.

Miles Hendon and Tom Canty were favourites of the King, all through his
brief reign, and his sincere mourners when he died. The good Earl
of Kent had too much sense to abuse his peculiar privilege; but he
exercised it twice after the instance we have seen of it before he was
called from this world--once at the accession of Queen Mary, and once at
the accession of Queen Elizabeth.  A descendant of his exercised it
at the accession of James I.  Before this one's son chose to use the
privilege, near a quarter of a century had elapsed, and the 'privilege
of the Kents' had faded out of most people's memories; so, when the Kent
of that day appeared before Charles I. and his court and sat down in the
sovereign's presence to assert and perpetuate the right of his house,
