by the mighty stroke that had fallen upon the royal house; and at the
end of the visit his 'elder sister'--afterwards the 'Bloody Mary' of
history--chilled him with a solemn interview which had but one merit in
his eyes, its brevity.  He had a few moments to himself, and then a slim
lad of about twelve years of age was admitted to his presence, whose
clothing, except his snowy ruff and the laces about his wrists, was of
black,--doublet, hose, and all.  He bore no badge of mourning but a knot
of purple ribbon on his shoulder.  He advanced hesitatingly, with head
bowed and bare, and dropped upon one knee in front of Tom. Tom sat still
and contemplated him soberly a moment.  Then he said--

"Rise, lad.  Who art thou.  What wouldst have?"

The boy rose, and stood at graceful ease, but with an aspect of concern
in his face.  He said--

"Of a surety thou must remember me, my lord.  I am thy whipping-boy."

"My _whipping_-boy?"

"The same, your Grace.  I am Humphrey--Humphrey Marlow."

Tom perceived that here was someone whom his keepers ought to have
posted him about.  The situation was delicate.  What should he
do?--pretend he knew this lad, and then betray by his every utterance
that he had never heard of him before?  No, that would not do.  An idea
came to his relief: accidents like this might be likely to happen with
some frequency, now that business urgencies would often call Hertford
and St. John from his side, they being members of the Council of
Executors; therefore perhaps it would be well to strike out a plan
himself to meet the requirements of such emergencies.  Yes, that would
be a wise course--he would practise on this boy, and see what sort of
success he might achieve.  So he stroked his brow perplexedly a moment
or two, and presently said--

"Now I seem to remember thee somewhat--but my wit is clogged and dim
with suffering--"

"Alack, my poor master!" ejaculated the whipping-boy, with feeling;
adding, to himself, "In truth 'tis as they said--his mind is gone--alas,
poor soul!  But misfortune catch me, how am I forgetting!  They said one
must not seem to observe that aught is wrong with him."

"'Tis strange how my memory doth wanton with me these days," said Tom.
"But mind it not--I mend apace--a little clue doth often serve to bring
me back again the things and names which had escaped me.  (And not they,
only, forsooth, but e'en such as I ne'er heard before--as this lad shall
see.)  Give thy business speech."

"'Tis matter of small weight, my liege, yet will I touch upon it, an' it
please your Grace.  Two days gone by, when your Majesty faulted thrice
in your Greek--in the morning lessons,--dost remember it?"

"Y-e-s--methinks I do.  (It is not much of a lie--an' I had meddled with
the Greek at all, I had not faulted simply thrice, but forty times.)
Yes, I do recall it, now--go on."

"The master, being wroth with what he termed such slovenly and doltish
work, did promise that he would soundly whip me for it--and--"

"Whip _thee_!" said Tom, astonished out of his presence of mind. "Why
should he whip _thee_ for faults of mine?"

"Ah, your Grace forgetteth again.  He always scourgeth me when thou dost
fail in thy lessons."

"True, true--I had forgot.  Thou teachest me in private--then if I fail,
he argueth that thy office was lamely done, and--"

"Oh, my liege, what words are these?  I, the humblest of thy servants,
presume to teach _thee_?"

"Then where is thy blame?  What riddle is this?  Am I in truth gone mad,
or is it thou?  Explain--speak out."

"But, good your Majesty, there's nought that needeth simplifying.--None
may visit the sacred person of the Prince of Wales with blows;
wherefore, when he faulteth, 'tis I that take them; and meet it is and
right, for that it is mine office and my livelihood." {1}

Tom stared at the tranquil boy, observing to himself, "Lo, it is a
wonderful thing,--a most strange and curious trade; I marvel they have
not hired a boy to take my combings and my dressings for me--would
heaven they would!--an' they will do this thing, I will take my lashings
in mine own person, giving God thanks for the change." Then he said
aloud--

"And hast thou been beaten, poor friend, according to the promise?"

"No, good your Majesty, my punishment was appointed for this day, and
peradventure it may be annulled, as unbefitting the season of mourning
that is come upon us; I know not, and so have made bold to come hither
and remind your Grace about your gracious promise to intercede in my
behalf--"

"With the master?  To save thee thy whipping?"

"Ah, thou dost remember!"

"My memory mendeth, thou seest.  Set thy mind at ease--thy back shall go
unscathed--I will see to it."

"Oh, thanks, my good lord!" cried the boy, dropping upon his knee again.
"Mayhap I have ventured far enow; and yet--"

Seeing Master Humphrey hesitate, Tom encouraged him to go on, saying he
was "in the granting mood."

"Then will I speak it out, for it lieth near my heart.  Sith thou art
no more Prince of Wales but King, thou canst order matters as thou wilt,
with none to say thee nay; wherefore it is not in reason that thou wilt
longer vex thyself with dreary studies, but wilt burn thy books and
turn thy mind to things less irksome. Then am I ruined, and mine orphan
sisters with me!"

"Ruined?  Prithee how?"

"My back is my bread, O my gracious liege! if it go idle, I starve.  An'
thou cease from study mine office is gone thou'lt need no whipping-boy.
Do not turn me away!"

Tom was touched with this pathetic distress.  He said, with a right
royal burst of generosity--

"Discomfort thyself no further, lad.  Thine office shall be permanent in
thee and thy line for ever."  Then he struck the boy a light blow on the
shoulder with the flat of his sword, exclaiming, "Rise, Humphrey Marlow,
Hereditary Grand Whipping-Boy to the Royal House of England!  Banish
sorrow--I will betake me to my books again, and study so ill that they
must in justice treble thy wage, so mightily shall the business of thine
office be augmented."

The grateful Humphrey responded fervidly--

"Thanks, O most noble master, this princely lavishness doth far surpass
my most distempered dreams of fortune.  Now shall I be happy all my
days, and all the house of Marlow after me."

Tom had wit enough to perceive that here was a lad who could be useful
to him.  He encouraged Humphrey to talk, and he was nothing loath.
 He was delighted to believe that he was helping in Tom's 'cure'; for
always, as soon as he had finished calling back to Tom's diseased mind
the various particulars of his experiences and adventures in the royal
school-room and elsewhere about the palace, he noticed that Tom was then
able to 'recall' the circumstances quite clearly.  At the end of an
hour Tom found himself well freighted with very valuable information
concerning personages and matters pertaining to the Court; so he
resolved to draw instruction from this source daily; and to this end he
would give order to admit Humphrey to the royal closet whenever he might
come, provided the Majesty of England was not engaged with other people.
 Humphrey had hardly been dismissed when my Lord Hertford arrived with
more trouble for Tom.

He said that the Lords of the Council, fearing that some overwrought
report of the King's damaged health might have leaked out and got
abroad, they deemed it wise and best that his Majesty should begin to
dine in public after a day or two--his wholesome complexion and vigorous
step, assisted by a carefully guarded repose of manner and ease and
grace of demeanour, would more surely quiet the general pulse--in case
any evil rumours _had_ gone about--than any other scheme that could be
devised.

Then the Earl proceeded, very delicately, to instruct Tom as to the
observances proper to the stately occasion, under the rather thin
disguise of 'reminding' him concerning things already known to him; but
to his vast gratification it turned out that Tom needed very little help
in this line--he had been making use of Humphrey in that direction, for
Humphrey had mentioned that within a few days he was to begin to dine
in public; having gathered it from the swift-winged gossip of the Court.
Tom kept these facts to himself, however.

Seeing the royal memory so improved, the Earl ventured to apply a
few tests to it, in an apparently casual way, to find out how far its
amendment had progressed.  The results were happy, here and there, in
spots--spots where Humphrey's tracks remained--and on the whole my lord
was greatly pleased and encouraged.  So encouraged was he, indeed, that
he spoke up and said in a quite hopeful voice--

"Now am I persuaded that if your Majesty will but tax your memory yet
a little further, it will resolve the puzzle of the Great Seal--a loss
which was of moment yesterday, although of none to-day, since its term
of service ended with our late lord's life. May it please your Grace to
make the trial?"

Tom was at sea--a Great Seal was something which he was totally
unacquainted with.  After a moment's hesitation he looked up innocently
and asked--

"What was it like, my lord?"

The Earl started, almost imperceptibly, muttering to himself, "Alack,
his wits are flown again!--it was ill wisdom to lead him on to strain
them"--then he deftly turned the talk to other matters, with the purpose
of sweeping the unlucky seal out of Tom's thoughts--a purpose which
easily succeeded.




CHAPTER XV. Tom as King.
