through it all a ragged lad, the most conspicuous figure in England,
stood, flushed and happy and proud, in the centre of the spacious
platform, with the great vassals of the kingdom kneeling around him.

Then all rose, and Tom Canty cried out--

"Now, O my King, take these regal garments back, and give poor Tom, thy
servant, his shreds and remnants again."

The Lord Protector spoke up--

"Let the small varlet be stripped and flung into the Tower."

But the new King, the true King, said--

"I will not have it so.  But for him I had not got my crown again--none
shall lay a hand upon him to harm him.  And as for thee, my good uncle,
my Lord Protector, this conduct of thine is not grateful toward
this poor lad, for I hear he hath made thee a duke"--the Protector
blushed--"yet he was not a king; wherefore what is thy fine title
worth now?  To-morrow you shall sue to me, _through him_, for its
confirmation, else no duke, but a simple earl, shalt thou remain."

Under this rebuke, his Grace the Duke of Somerset retired a little from
the front for the moment.  The King turned to Tom, and said kindly--"My
poor boy, how was it that you could remember where I hid the Seal when I
could not remember it myself?"

"Ah, my King, that was easy, since I used it divers days."

"Used it--yet could not explain where it was?"

"I did not know it was _that_ they wanted.  They did not describe it,
your Majesty."

"Then how used you it?"

The red blood began to steal up into Tom's cheeks, and he dropped his
eyes and was silent.

"Speak up, good lad, and fear nothing," said the King.  "How used you
the Great Seal of England?"

Tom stammered a moment, in a pathetic confusion, then got it out--

"To crack nuts with!"

Poor child, the avalanche of laughter that greeted this nearly swept him
off his feet.  But if a doubt remained in any mind that Tom Canty was
not the King of England and familiar with the august appurtenances of
royalty, this reply disposed of it utterly.

Meantime the sumptuous robe of state had been removed from Tom's
shoulders to the King's, whose rags were effectually hidden from sight
under it.  Then the coronation ceremonies were resumed; the true King
was anointed and the crown set upon his head, whilst cannon thundered
the news to the city, and all London seemed to rock with applause.




CHAPTER XXXIII. Edward as King.

Miles Hendon was picturesque enough before he got into the riot on
London Bridge--he was more so when he got out of it.  He had but little
money when he got in, none at all when he got out.  The pickpockets had
stripped him of his last farthing.

But no matter, so he found his boy.  Being a soldier, he did not go at
his task in a random way, but set to work, first of all, to arrange his
campaign.

What would the boy naturally do?  Where would he naturally go?
Well--argued Miles--he would naturally go to his former haunts, for that
is the instinct of unsound minds, when homeless and forsaken, as well
as of sound ones.  Whereabouts were his former haunts?  His rags,
taken together with the low villain who seemed to know him and who even
claimed to be his father, indicated that his home was in one or another
of the poorest and meanest districts of London.  Would the search for
him be difficult, or long?  No, it was likely to be easy and brief.  He
would not hunt for the boy, he would hunt for a crowd; in the centre of
a big crowd or a little one, sooner or later, he should find his poor
little friend, sure; and the mangy mob would be entertaining itself
with pestering and aggravating the boy, who would be proclaiming himself
King, as usual.  Then Miles Hendon would cripple some of those people,
and carry off his little ward, and comfort and cheer him with loving
words, and the two would never be separated any more.

So Miles started on his quest.  Hour after hour he tramped through back
alleys and squalid streets, seeking groups and crowds, and finding no
end of them, but never any sign of the boy.  This greatly surprised him,
but did not discourage him.  To his notion, there was nothing the matter
with his plan of campaign; the only miscalculation about it was that the
campaign was becoming a lengthy one, whereas he had expected it to be
short.

When daylight arrived, at last, he had made many a mile, and canvassed
many a crowd, but the only result was that he was tolerably tired,
rather hungry and very sleepy.  He wanted some breakfast, but there was
no way to get it.  To beg for it did not occur to him; as to pawning
his sword, he would as soon have thought of parting with his honour;
he could spare some of his clothes--yes, but one could as easily find a
customer for a disease as for such clothes.

At noon he was still tramping--among the rabble which followed after
the royal procession, now; for he argued that this regal display would
attract his little lunatic powerfully.  He followed the pageant through
all its devious windings about London, and all the way to Westminster
and the Abbey.  He drifted here and there amongst the multitudes
that were massed in the vicinity for a weary long time, baffled and
perplexed, and finally wandered off, thinking, and trying to contrive
some way to better his plan of campaign.  By-and-by, when he came to
himself out of his musings, he discovered that the town was far behind
him and that the day was growing old.  He was near the river, and in the
country; it was a region of fine rural seats--not the sort of district
to welcome clothes like his.

It was not at all cold; so he stretched himself on the ground in the lee
of a hedge to rest and think.  Drowsiness presently began to settle upon
his senses; the faint and far-off boom of cannon was wafted to his ear,
and he said to himself, "The new King is crowned," and straightway fell
asleep.  He had not slept or rested, before, for more than thirty hours.
He did not wake again until near the middle of the next morning.

He got up, lame, stiff, and half famished, washed himself in the river,
stayed his stomach with a pint or two of water, and trudged off toward
Westminster, grumbling at himself for having wasted so much time.
 Hunger helped him to a new plan, now; he would try to get speech with
old Sir Humphrey Marlow and borrow a few marks, and--but that was enough
of a plan for the present; it would be time enough to enlarge it when
this first stage should be accomplished.

Toward eleven o'clock he approached the palace; and although a host of
showy people were about him, moving in the same direction, he was not
inconspicuous--his costume took care of that.  He watched these people's
faces narrowly, hoping to find a charitable one whose possessor might
be willing to carry his name to the old lieutenant--as to trying to get
into the palace himself, that was simply out of the question.

Presently our whipping-boy passed him, then wheeled about and scanned
his figure well, saying to himself, "An' that is not the very vagabond
his Majesty is in such a worry about, then am I an ass--though belike I
was that before.  He answereth the description to a rag--that God should
make two such would be to cheapen miracles by wasteful repetition.  I
would I could contrive an excuse to speak with him."

Miles Hendon saved him the trouble; for he turned about, then, as a man
generally will when somebody mesmerises him by gazing hard at him from
behind; and observing a strong interest in the boy's eyes, he stepped
toward him and said--

"You have just come out from the palace; do you belong there?"

"Yes, your worship."

"Know you Sir Humphrey Marlow?"

The boy started, and said to himself, "Lord! mine old departed father!"
Then he answered aloud, "Right well, your worship."

"Good--is he within?"

"Yes," said the boy; and added, to himself, "within his grave."

"Might I crave your favour to carry my name to him, and say I beg to say
a word in his ear?"

"I will despatch the business right willingly, fair sir."

"Then say Miles Hendon, son of Sir Richard, is here without--I shall be
greatly bounden to you, my good lad."

The boy looked disappointed.  "The King did not name him so," he said to
himself; "but it mattereth not, this is his twin brother, and can give
his Majesty news of t'other Sir-Odds-and-Ends, I warrant."  So he said
to Miles, "Step in there a moment, good sir, and wait till I bring you
word."

Hendon retired to the place indicated--it was a recess sunk in the
palace wall, with a stone bench in it--a shelter for sentinels in bad
weather. He had hardly seated himself when some halberdiers, in charge
of an officer, passed by.  The officer saw him, halted his men, and
commanded Hendon to come forth.  He obeyed, and was promptly arrested
as a suspicious character prowling within the precincts of the palace.
 Things began to look ugly.  Poor Miles was going to explain, but the
officer roughly silenced him, and ordered his men to disarm him and
search him.

"God of his mercy grant that they find somewhat," said poor Miles; "I
have searched enow, and failed, yet is my need greater than theirs."

Nothing was found but a document.  The officer tore it open, and Hendon
smiled when he recognised the 'pot-hooks' made by his lost little friend
that black day at Hendon Hall.  The officer's face grew dark as he read
the English paragraph, and Miles blenched to the opposite colour as he
listened.

"Another new claimant of the Crown!" cried the officer.  "Verily they
breed like rabbits, to-day.  Seize the rascal, men, and see ye keep
him fast whilst I convey this precious paper within and send it to the
