law, hoping to free De Lacey and Agatha by this proceeding.

"He did not succeed.  They remained confined for five months before the
trial took place, the result of which deprived them of their fortune
and condemned them to a perpetual exile from their native country.

"They found a miserable asylum in the cottage in Germany, where I
discovered them.  Felix soon learned that the treacherous Turk, for
whom he and his family endured such unheard-of oppression, on
discovering that his deliverer was thus reduced to poverty and ruin,
became a traitor to good feeling and honour and had quitted Italy with
his daughter, insultingly sending Felix a pittance of money to aid him,
as he said, in some plan of future maintenance.

"Such were the events that preyed on the heart of Felix and rendered
him, when I first saw him, the most miserable of his family.  He could
have endured poverty, and while this distress had been the meed of his
virtue, he gloried in it; but the ingratitude of the Turk and the loss
of his beloved Safie were misfortunes more bitter and irreparable.  The
arrival of the Arabian now infused new life into his soul.

"When the news reached Leghorn that Felix was deprived of his wealth
and rank, the merchant commanded his daughter to think no more of her
lover, but to prepare to return to her native country.  The generous
nature of Safie was outraged by this command; she attempted to
expostulate with her father, but he left her angrily, reiterating his
tyrannical mandate.

"A few days after, the Turk entered his daughter's apartment and told
her hastily that he had reason to believe that his residence at Leghorn
had been divulged and that he should speedily be delivered up to the
French government; he had consequently hired a vessel to convey him to
Constantinople, for which city he should sail in a few hours.  He
intended to leave his daughter under the care of a confidential
servant, to follow at her leisure with the greater part of his
property, which had not yet arrived at Leghorn.

"When alone, Safie resolved in her own mind the plan of conduct that it
would become her to pursue in this emergency.  A residence in Turkey
was abhorrent to her; her religion and her feelings were alike averse
to it.  By some papers of her father which fell into her hands she
heard of the exile of her lover and learnt the name of the spot where
he then resided.  She hesitated some time, but at length she formed her
determination.  Taking with her some jewels that belonged to her and a
sum of money, she quitted Italy with an attendant, a native of Leghorn,
but who understood the common language of Turkey, and departed for
Germany.

"She arrived in safety at a town about twenty leagues from the cottage
of De Lacey, when her attendant fell dangerously ill.  Safie nursed her
with the most devoted affection, but the poor girl died, and the
Arabian was left alone, unacquainted with the language of the country
and utterly ignorant of the customs of the world.  She fell, however,
into good hands.  The Italian had mentioned the name of the spot for
which they were bound, and after her death the woman of the house in
which they had lived took care that Safie should arrive in safety at
the cottage of her lover."



Chapter 15

"Such was the history of my beloved cottagers.  It impressed me deeply.
I learned, from the views of social life which it developed, to admire
their virtues and to deprecate the vices of mankind.

"As yet I looked upon crime as a distant evil, benevolence and
generosity were ever present before me, inciting within me a desire to
become an actor in the busy scene where so many admirable qualities
were called forth and displayed.  But in giving an account of the
progress of my intellect, I must not omit a circumstance which occurred
in the beginning of the month of August of the same year.

"One night during my accustomed visit to the neighbouring wood where I
collected my own food and brought home firing for my protectors, I
found on the ground a leathern portmanteau containing several articles
of dress and some books.  I eagerly seized the prize and returned with
it to my hovel.  Fortunately the books were written in the language,
the elements of which I had acquired at the cottage; they consisted of
Paradise Lost, a volume of Plutarch's Lives, and the Sorrows of Werter.
The possession of these treasures gave me extreme delight; I now
continually studied and exercised my mind upon these histories, whilst
my friends were employed in their ordinary occupations.

"I can hardly describe to you the effect of these books.  They produced
in me an infinity of new images and feelings, that sometimes raised me
to ecstasy, but more frequently sunk me into the lowest dejection.  In
the Sorrows of Werter, besides the interest of its simple and affecting
story, so many opinions are canvassed and so many lights thrown upon
what had hitherto been to me obscure subjects that I found in it a
never-ending source of speculation and astonishment.  The gentle and
domestic manners it described, combined with lofty sentiments and
feelings, which had for their object something out of self, accorded
well with my experience among my protectors and with the wants which
were forever alive in my own bosom.  But I thought Werter himself a
more divine being than I had ever beheld or imagined; his character
contained no pretension, but it sank deep.  The disquisitions upon
death and suicide were calculated to fill  me with wonder.  I did not
pretend to enter into the merits of the case, yet I inclined towards
the opinions of the hero, whose extinction I wept, without precisely
understanding it.

"As I read, however, I applied much personally to my own feelings and
condition.  I found myself similar yet at the same time strangely
unlike to the beings concerning whom I read and to whose conversation I
was a listener.  I sympathized with and partly understood them, but I
was unformed in mind; I was dependent on none and related to none.
'The path of my departure was free,' and there was none to lament my
annihilation.  My person was hideous and my stature gigantic.  What did
this mean?  Who was I?  What was I?  Whence did I come?  What was my
destination?  These questions continually recurred, but I was unable to
solve them.

"The volume of Plutarch's Lives which I possessed contained the
histories of the first founders of the ancient republics.  This book
had a far different effect upon me from the Sorrows of Werter.  I
learned from Werter's imaginations despondency and gloom, but Plutarch
taught me high thoughts; he elevated me above the wretched sphere of my
own reflections, to admire and love the heroes of past ages.  Many
things I read surpassed my understanding and experience.  I had a very
confused knowledge of kingdoms, wide extents of country, mighty rivers,
and boundless seas.  But I was perfectly unacquainted with towns and
large assemblages of men. The cottage of my protectors had been the
only school in which I had studied human nature, but this book
developed new and mightier scenes of action.  I read of men concerned
in public affairs, governing or massacring their species.  I felt the
greatest ardour for virtue rise within me, and abhorrence for vice, as
far as I understood the signification of those terms, relative as they
were, as I applied them, to pleasure and pain alone.  Induced by these
feelings, I was of course led to admire peaceable lawgivers, Numa,
Solon, and Lycurgus, in preference to Romulus and Theseus.  The
patriarchal lives of my protectors caused these impressions to take a
firm hold on my mind; perhaps, if my first introduction to humanity had
been made by a young soldier, burning for glory and slaughter, I should
have been imbued with different sensations.

"But Paradise Lost excited different and far deeper emotions.  I read
it, as I had read the other volumes which had fallen into my hands, as
a true history.  It moved every feeling of wonder and awe that the
picture of an omnipotent God warring with his creatures was capable of
exciting.  I often referred the several situations, as their similarity
struck me, to my own.  Like Adam, I was apparently united by no link to
any other being in existence; but his state was far different from mine
in every other respect.  He had come forth from the hands of God a
perfect creature, happy and prosperous, guarded by the especial care of
his Creator; he was allowed to converse with and acquire knowledge from
beings of a superior nature, but I was wretched, helpless, and alone.
Many times I considered Satan as the fitter emblem of my condition, for
often, like him, when I viewed the bliss of my protectors, the bitter
gall of envy rose within me.

"Another circumstance strengthened and confirmed these feelings.  Soon
after my arrival in the hovel I discovered some papers in the pocket of
the dress which I had taken from your laboratory.  At first I had
neglected them, but now that I was able to decipher the characters in
which they were written, I began to study them with diligence.  It was
your journal of the four months that preceded my creation.  You
minutely described in these papers every step you took in the progress
of your work; this history was mingled with accounts of domestic
occurrences.  You doubtless recollect these papers.  Here they are.
Everything is related in them which bears reference to my accursed
origin; the whole detail of that series of disgusting circumstances
which produced it is set in view; the minutest description of my odious
and loathsome person is given, in language which painted your own
horrors and rendered mine indelible.  I sickened as I read.  'Hateful
day when I received life!' I exclaimed in agony.  'Accursed creator!
Why did you form a monster so hideous that even YOU turned from me in
disgust?  God, in pity, made man beautiful and alluring, after his own
image; but my form is a filthy type of yours, more horrid even from the
very resemblance.  Satan had his companions, fellow devils, to admire
and encourage him, but I am solitary and abhorred.'

"These were the reflections of my hours of despondency and solitude;
but when I contemplated the virtues of the cottagers, their amiable and
benevolent dispositions, I persuaded myself that when they should
become acquainted with my admiration of their virtues they  would
compassionate me and overlook my personal deformity.  Could they turn
from their door one, however monstrous, who solicited their compassion
and friendship?  I resolved, at least, not to despair, but in every way
to fit myself for an interview with them which would decide my fate.  I
postponed this attempt for some months longer, for the importance
attached to its success inspired me with a dread lest I should fail.
Besides, I found that my understanding improved so much with every
day's experience that I was unwilling to commence this undertaking
until a few more months should have added to my sagacity.

"Several changes, in the meantime, took place in the cottage.  The
presence of Safie diffused happiness among its inhabitants, and I also
found that a greater degree of plenty reigned there.  Felix and Agatha
spent more time in amusement and conversation, and were assisted in
their labours by servants.  They did not appear rich, but they were
contented and happy; their feelings were serene and peaceful, while
mine became every day more tumultuous.  Increase of knowledge only
discovered to me more clearly what a wretched outcast I was.  I
cherished hope, it is true, but it vanished when I beheld my person
reflected in water or my shadow in the moonshine, even as that frail
image and that inconstant shade.

"I endeavoured to crush these fears and to fortify myself for the trial
which in a few months I resolved to undergo; and sometimes I allowed my
