Opera.]

Gwendolen.  This dignified silence seems to produce an unpleasant effect.

Cecily.  A most distasteful one.

Gwendolen.  But we will not be the first to speak.

Cecily.  Certainly not.

Gwendolen.  Mr. Worthing, I have something very particular to ask you.
Much depends on your reply.

Cecily.  Gwendolen, your common sense is invaluable.  Mr. Moncrieff,
kindly answer me the following question.  Why did you pretend to be my
guardian's brother?

Algernon.  In order that I might have an opportunity of meeting you.

Cecily.  [To Gwendolen.]  That certainly seems a satisfactory
explanation, does it not?

Gwendolen.  Yes, dear, if you can believe him.

Cecily.  I don't.  But that does not affect the wonderful beauty of his
answer.

Gwendolen.  True.  In matters of grave importance, style, not sincerity
is the vital thing.  Mr. Worthing, what explanation can you offer to me
for pretending to have a brother?  Was it in order that you might have an
opportunity of coming up to town to see me as often as possible?

Jack.  Can you doubt it, Miss Fairfax?

Gwendolen.  I have the gravest doubts upon the subject.  But I intend to
crush them.  This is not the moment for German scepticism.  [Moving to
Cecily.]  Their explanations appear to be quite satisfactory, especially
Mr. Worthing's.  That seems to me to have the stamp of truth upon it.

Cecily.  I am more than content with what Mr. Moncrieff said.  His voice
alone inspires one with absolute credulity.

Gwendolen.  Then you think we should forgive them?

Cecily.  Yes.  I mean no.

Gwendolen.  True!  I had forgotten.  There are principles at stake that
one cannot surrender.  Which of us should tell them?  The task is not a
pleasant one.

Cecily.  Could we not both speak at the same time?

Gwendolen.  An excellent idea!  I nearly always speak at the same time as
other people.  Will you take the time from me?

Cecily.  Certainly.  [Gwendolen beats time with uplifted finger.]

Gwendolen and Cecily [Speaking together.]  Your Christian names are still
an insuperable barrier.  That is all!

Jack and Algernon [Speaking together.]  Our Christian names!  Is that
all?  But we are going to be christened this afternoon.

Gwendolen.  [To Jack.]  For my sake you are prepared to do this terrible
thing?

Jack.  I am.

Cecily.  [To Algernon.]  To please me you are ready to face this fearful
ordeal?

Algernon.  I am!

Gwendolen.  How absurd to talk of the equality of the sexes!  Where
questions of self-sacrifice are concerned, men are infinitely beyond us.

Jack.  We are.  [Clasps hands with Algernon.]

Cecily.  They have moments of physical courage of which we women know
absolutely nothing.

Gwendolen.  [To Jack.]  Darling!

Algernon.  [To Cecily.]  Darling!  [They fall into each other's arms.]

[Enter Merriman.  When he enters he coughs loudly, seeing the situation.]

Merriman.  Ahem!  Ahem!  Lady Bracknell!

Jack.  Good heavens!

[Enter Lady Bracknell.  The couples separate in alarm.  Exit Merriman.]

Lady Bracknell.  Gwendolen!  What does this mean?

Gwendolen.  Merely that I am engaged to be married to Mr. Worthing,
mamma.

Lady Bracknell.  Come here.  Sit down.  Sit down immediately.  Hesitation
of any kind is a sign of mental decay in the young, of physical weakness
in the old.  [Turns to Jack.]  Apprised, sir, of my daughter's sudden
flight by her trusty maid, whose confidence I purchased by means of a
small coin, I followed her at once by a luggage train.  Her unhappy
father is, I am glad to say, under the impression that she is attending a
more than usually lengthy lecture by the University Extension Scheme on
the Influence of a permanent income on Thought.  I do not propose to
undeceive him.  Indeed I have never undeceived him on any question.  I
would consider it wrong.  But of course, you will clearly understand that
all communication between yourself and my daughter must cease immediately
from this moment.  On this point, as indeed on all points, I am firm.

Jack.  I am engaged to be married to Gwendolen, Lady Bracknell!

Lady Bracknell.  You are nothing of the kind, sir.  And now, as regards
Algernon! . . . Algernon!

Algernon.  Yes, Aunt Augusta.

Lady Bracknell.  May I ask if it is in this house that your invalid
friend Mr. Bunbury resides?

Algernon.  [Stammering.]  Oh!  No!  Bunbury doesn't live here.  Bunbury
is somewhere else at present.  In fact, Bunbury is dead.

Lady Bracknell.  Dead!  When did Mr. Bunbury die?  His death must have
been extremely sudden.

Algernon.  [Airily.]  Oh!  I killed Bunbury this afternoon.  I mean poor
Bunbury died this afternoon.

Lady Bracknell.  What did he die of?

Algernon.  Bunbury?  Oh, he was quite exploded.

Lady Bracknell.  Exploded!  Was he the victim of a revolutionary outrage?
I was not aware that Mr. Bunbury was interested in social legislation.  If
so, he is well punished for his morbidity.

Algernon.  My dear Aunt Augusta, I mean he was found out!  The doctors
found out that Bunbury could not live, that is what I mean--so Bunbury
died.

Lady Bracknell.  He seems to have had great confidence in the opinion of
his physicians.  I am glad, however, that he made up his mind at the last
to some definite course of action, and acted under proper medical advice.
And now that we have finally got rid of this Mr. Bunbury, may I ask, Mr.
Worthing, who is that young person whose hand my nephew Algernon is now
holding in what seems to me a peculiarly unnecessary manner?

Jack.  That lady is Miss Cecily Cardew, my ward.  [Lady Bracknell bows
coldly to Cecily.]

Algernon.  I am engaged to be married to Cecily, Aunt Augusta.

Lady Bracknell.  I beg your pardon?

Cecily.  Mr. Moncrieff and I are engaged to be married, Lady Bracknell.

Lady Bracknell.  [With a shiver, crossing to the sofa and sitting down.]
I do not know whether there is anything peculiarly exciting in the air of
this particular part of Hertfordshire, but the number of engagements that
go on seems to me considerably above the proper average that statistics
have laid down for our guidance.  I think some preliminary inquiry on my
part would not be out of place.  Mr. Worthing, is Miss Cardew at all
connected with any of the larger railway stations in London?  I merely
desire information.  Until yesterday I had no idea that there were any
families or persons whose origin was a Terminus.  [Jack looks perfectly
furious, but restrains himself.]

Jack.  [In a clear, cold voice.]  Miss Cardew is the grand-daughter of
the late Mr. Thomas Cardew of 149 Belgrave Square, S.W.; Gervase Park,
Dorking, Surrey; and the Sporran, Fifeshire, N.B.

Lady Bracknell.  That sounds not unsatisfactory.  Three addresses always
inspire confidence, even in tradesmen.  But what proof have I of their
authenticity?

Jack.  I have carefully preserved the Court Guides of the period.  They
are open to your inspection, Lady Bracknell.

Lady Bracknell.  [Grimly.]  I have known strange errors in that
publication.

Jack.  Miss Cardew's family solicitors are Messrs. Markby, Markby, and
Markby.

Lady Bracknell.  Markby, Markby, and Markby?  A firm of the very highest
position in their profession.  Indeed I am told that one of the Mr.
Markby's is occasionally to be seen at dinner parties.  So far I am
satisfied.

Jack.  [Very irritably.]  How extremely kind of you, Lady Bracknell!  I
have also in my possession, you will be pleased to hear, certificates of
Miss Cardew's birth, baptism, whooping cough, registration, vaccination,
confirmation, and the measles; both the German and the English variety.

Lady Bracknell.  Ah! A life crowded with incident, I see; though perhaps
somewhat too exciting for a young girl.  I am not myself in favour of
premature experiences.  [Rises, looks at her watch.]  Gwendolen! the time
approaches for our departure.  We have not a moment to lose.  As a matter
