surmised that they are bills, as Algernon, after looking at the
envelopes, tears them up.]

Algernon.  A glass of sherry, Lane.

Lane.  Yes, sir.

Algernon.  To-morrow, Lane, I'm going Bunburying.

Lane.  Yes, sir.

Algernon.  I shall probably not be back till Monday.  You can put up my
dress clothes, my smoking jacket, and all the Bunbury suits . . .

Lane.  Yes, sir.  [Handing sherry.]

Algernon.  I hope to-morrow will be a fine day, Lane.

Lane.  It never is, sir.

Algernon.  Lane, you're a perfect pessimist.

Lane.  I do my best to give satisfaction, sir.

[Enter Jack.  Lane goes off.]

Jack.  There's a sensible, intellectual girl! the only girl I ever cared
for in my life.  [Algernon is laughing immoderately.]  What on earth are
you so amused at?

Algernon.  Oh, I'm a little anxious about poor Bunbury, that is all.

Jack.  If you don't take care, your friend Bunbury will get you into a
serious scrape some day.

Algernon.  I love scrapes.  They are the only things that are never
serious.

Jack.  Oh, that's nonsense, Algy.  You never talk anything but nonsense.

Algernon.  Nobody ever does.

[Jack looks indignantly at him, and leaves the room.  Algernon lights a
cigarette, reads his shirt-cuff, and smiles.]

ACT DROP




SECOND ACT


SCENE


Garden at the Manor House.  A flight of grey stone steps leads up to the
house.  The garden, an old-fashioned one, full of roses.  Time of year,
July.  Basket chairs, and a table covered with books, are set under a
large yew-tree.

[Miss Prism discovered seated at the table.  Cecily is at the back
watering flowers.]

Miss Prism.  [Calling.]  Cecily, Cecily!  Surely such a utilitarian
occupation as the watering of flowers is rather Moulton's duty than
yours?  Especially at a moment when intellectual pleasures await you.
Your German grammar is on the table.  Pray open it at page fifteen.  We
will repeat yesterday's lesson.

Cecily.  [Coming over very slowly.]  But I don't like German.  It isn't
at all a becoming language.  I know perfectly well that I look quite
plain after my German lesson.

Miss Prism.  Child, you know how anxious your guardian is that you should
improve yourself in every way.  He laid particular stress on your German,
as he was leaving for town yesterday.  Indeed, he always lays stress on
your German when he is leaving for town.

Cecily.  Dear Uncle Jack is so very serious!  Sometimes he is so serious
that I think he cannot be quite well.

Miss Prism.  [Drawing herself up.]  Your guardian enjoys the best of
health, and his gravity of demeanour is especially to be commended in one
so comparatively young as he is.  I know no one who has a higher sense of
duty and responsibility.

Cecily.  I suppose that is why he often looks a little bored when we
three are together.

Miss Prism.  Cecily!  I am surprised at you.  Mr. Worthing has many
troubles in his life.  Idle merriment and triviality would be out of
place in his conversation.  You must remember his constant anxiety about
that unfortunate young man his brother.

Cecily.  I wish Uncle Jack would allow that unfortunate young man, his
brother, to come down here sometimes.  We might have a good influence
over him, Miss Prism.  I am sure you certainly would.  You know German,
and geology, and things of that kind influence a man very much.  [Cecily
begins to write in her diary.]

Miss Prism.  [Shaking her head.]  I do not think that even I could
produce any effect on a character that according to his own brother's
admission is irretrievably weak and vacillating.  Indeed I am not sure
that I would desire to reclaim him.  I am not in favour of this modern
mania for turning bad people into good people at a moment's notice.  As a
man sows so let him reap.  You must put away your diary, Cecily.  I
really don't see why you should keep a diary at all.

Cecily.  I keep a diary in order to enter the wonderful secrets of my
life.  If I didn't write them down, I should probably forget all about
them.

Miss Prism.  Memory, my dear Cecily, is the diary that we all carry about
with us.

Cecily.  Yes, but it usually chronicles the things that have never
happened, and couldn't possibly have happened.  I believe that Memory is
responsible for nearly all the three-volume novels that Mudie sends us.

Miss Prism.  Do not speak slightingly of the three-volume novel, Cecily.
I wrote one myself in earlier days.

Cecily.  Did you really, Miss Prism?  How wonderfully clever you are!  I
hope it did not end happily?  I don't like novels that end happily.  They
depress me so much.

Miss Prism.  The good ended happily, and the bad unhappily.  That is what
Fiction means.

Cecily.  I suppose so.  But it seems very unfair.  And was your novel
ever published?

Miss Prism.  Alas! no.  The manuscript unfortunately was abandoned.
[Cecily starts.]  I use the word in the sense of lost or mislaid.  To
your work, child, these speculations are profitless.

Cecily.  [Smiling.]  But I see dear Dr. Chasuble coming up through the
garden.

Miss Prism.  [Rising and advancing.]  Dr. Chasuble!  This is indeed a
pleasure.

[Enter Canon Chasuble.]

Chasuble.  And how are we this morning?  Miss Prism, you are, I trust,
well?

Cecily.  Miss Prism has just been complaining of a slight headache.  I
think it would do her so much good to have a short stroll with you in the
Park, Dr. Chasuble.

Miss Prism.  Cecily, I have not mentioned anything about a headache.

Cecily.  No, dear Miss Prism, I know that, but I felt instinctively that
you had a headache.  Indeed I was thinking about that, and not about my
German lesson, when the Rector came in.

Chasuble.  I hope, Cecily, you are not inattentive.

Cecily.  Oh, I am afraid I am.

Chasuble.  That is strange.  Were I fortunate enough to be Miss Prism's
pupil, I would hang upon her lips.  [Miss Prism glares.]  I spoke
metaphorically.--My metaphor was drawn from bees.  Ahem!  Mr. Worthing, I
suppose, has not returned from town yet?

Miss Prism.  We do not expect him till Monday afternoon.

Chasuble.  Ah yes, he usually likes to spend his Sunday in London.  He is
not one of those whose sole aim is enjoyment, as, by all accounts, that
unfortunate young man his brother seems to be.  But I must not disturb
Egeria and her pupil any longer.

Miss Prism.  Egeria?  My name is Laetitia, Doctor.

Chasuble.  [Bowing.]  A classical allusion merely, drawn from the Pagan
authors.  I shall see you both no doubt at Evensong?

Miss Prism.  I think, dear Doctor, I will have a stroll with you.  I find
I have a headache after all, and a walk might do it good.

Chasuble.  With pleasure, Miss Prism, with pleasure.  We might go as far
as the schools and back.

Miss Prism.  That would be delightful.  Cecily, you will read your
Political Economy in my absence.  The chapter on the Fall of the Rupee
you may omit.  It is somewhat too sensational.  Even these metallic
problems have their melodramatic side.

[Goes down the garden with Dr. Chasuble.]

Cecily.  [Picks up books and throws them back on table.]  Horrid
Political Economy!  Horrid Geography!  Horrid, horrid German!

[Enter Merriman with a card on a salver.]

Merriman.  Mr. Ernest Worthing has just driven over from the station.  He
has brought his luggage with him.

