Algernon.  [To Gwendolen.]  Dear me, you are smart!

Gwendolen.  I am always smart!  Am I not, Mr. Worthing?

Jack.  You're quite perfect, Miss Fairfax.

Gwendolen.  Oh! I hope I am not that.  It would leave no room for
developments, and I intend to develop in many directions.  [Gwendolen and
Jack sit down together in the corner.]

Lady Bracknell.  I'm sorry if we are a little late, Algernon, but I was
obliged to call on dear Lady Harbury.  I hadn't been there since her poor
husband's death.  I never saw a woman so altered; she looks quite twenty
years younger.  And now I'll have a cup of tea, and one of those nice
cucumber sandwiches you promised me.

Algernon.  Certainly, Aunt Augusta.  [Goes over to tea-table.]

Lady Bracknell.  Won't you come and sit here, Gwendolen?

Gwendolen.  Thanks, mamma, I'm quite comfortable where I am.

Algernon.  [Picking up empty plate in horror.]  Good heavens!  Lane!  Why
are there no cucumber sandwiches?  I ordered them specially.

Lane.  [Gravely.]  There were no cucumbers in the market this morning,
sir.  I went down twice.

Algernon.  No cucumbers!

Lane.  No, sir.  Not even for ready money.

Algernon.  That will do, Lane, thank you.

Lane.  Thank you, sir.  [Goes out.]

Algernon.  I am greatly distressed, Aunt Augusta, about there being no
cucumbers, not even for ready money.

Lady Bracknell.  It really makes no matter, Algernon.  I had some
crumpets with Lady Harbury, who seems to me to be living entirely for
pleasure now.

Algernon.  I hear her hair has turned quite gold from grief.

Lady Bracknell.  It certainly has changed its colour.  From what cause I,
of course, cannot say.  [Algernon crosses and hands tea.]  Thank you.
I've quite a treat for you to-night, Algernon.  I am going to send you
down with Mary Farquhar.  She is such a nice woman, and so attentive to
her husband.  It's delightful to watch them.

Algernon.  I am afraid, Aunt Augusta, I shall have to give up the
pleasure of dining with you to-night after all.

Lady Bracknell.  [Frowning.]  I hope not, Algernon.  It would put my
table completely out.  Your uncle would have to dine upstairs.
Fortunately he is accustomed to that.

Algernon.  It is a great bore, and, I need hardly say, a terrible
disappointment to me, but the fact is I have just had a telegram to say
that my poor friend Bunbury is very ill again.  [Exchanges glances with
Jack.]  They seem to think I should be with him.

Lady Bracknell.  It is very strange.  This Mr. Bunbury seems to suffer
from curiously bad health.

Algernon.  Yes; poor Bunbury is a dreadful invalid.

Lady Bracknell.  Well, I must say, Algernon, that I think it is high time
that Mr. Bunbury made up his mind whether he was going to live or to die.
This shilly-shallying with the question is absurd.  Nor do I in any way
approve of the modern sympathy with invalids.  I consider it morbid.
Illness of any kind is hardly a thing to be encouraged in others.  Health
is the primary duty of life.  I am always telling that to your poor
uncle, but he never seems to take much notice . . . as far as any
improvement in his ailment goes.  I should be much obliged if you would
ask Mr. Bunbury, from me, to be kind enough not to have a relapse on
Saturday, for I rely on you to arrange my music for me.  It is my last
reception, and one wants something that will encourage conversation,
particularly at the end of the season when every one has practically said
whatever they had to say, which, in most cases, was probably not much.

Algernon.  I'll speak to Bunbury, Aunt Augusta, if he is still conscious,
and I think I can promise you he'll be all right by Saturday.  Of course
the music is a great difficulty.  You see, if one plays good music,
people don't listen, and if one plays bad music people don't talk.  But
I'll run over the programme I've drawn out, if you will kindly come into
the next room for a moment.

Lady Bracknell.  Thank you, Algernon.  It is very thoughtful of you.
[Rising, and following Algernon.]  I'm sure the programme will be
delightful, after a few expurgations.  French songs I cannot possibly
allow.  People always seem to think that they are improper, and either
look shocked, which is vulgar, or laugh, which is worse.  But German
sounds a thoroughly respectable language, and indeed, I believe is so.
Gwendolen, you will accompany me.

Gwendolen.  Certainly, mamma.

[Lady Bracknell and Algernon go into the music-room, Gwendolen remains
behind.]

Jack.  Charming day it has been, Miss Fairfax.

Gwendolen.  Pray don't talk to me about the weather, Mr. Worthing.
Whenever people talk to me about the weather, I always feel quite certain
that they mean something else.  And that makes me so nervous.

Jack.  I do mean something else.

Gwendolen.  I thought so.  In fact, I am never wrong.

Jack.  And I would like to be allowed to take advantage of Lady
Bracknell's temporary absence . . .

Gwendolen.  I would certainly advise you to do so.  Mamma has a way of
coming back suddenly into a room that I have often had to speak to her
about.

Jack.  [Nervously.]  Miss Fairfax, ever since I met you I have admired
you more than any girl . . . I have ever met since . . . I met you.

Gwendolen.  Yes, I am quite well aware of the fact.  And I often wish
that in public, at any rate, you had been more demonstrative.  For me you
have always had an irresistible fascination.  Even before I met you I was
far from indifferent to you.  [Jack looks at her in amazement.]  We live,
as I hope you know, Mr. Worthing, in an age of ideals.  The fact is
constantly mentioned in the more expensive monthly magazines, and has
reached the provincial pulpits, I am told; and my ideal has always been
to love some one of the name of Ernest.  There is something in that name
that inspires absolute confidence.  The moment Algernon first mentioned
to me that he had a friend called Ernest, I knew I was destined to love
you.

Jack.  You really love me, Gwendolen?

Gwendolen.  Passionately!

Jack.  Darling!  You don't know how happy you've made me.

Gwendolen.  My own Ernest!

Jack.  But you don't really mean to say that you couldn't love me if my
name wasn't Ernest?

Gwendolen.  But your name is Ernest.

Jack.  Yes, I know it is.  But supposing it was something else?  Do you
mean to say you couldn't love me then?

Gwendolen.  [Glibly.]  Ah! that is clearly a metaphysical speculation,
and like most metaphysical speculations has very little reference at all
to the actual facts of real life, as we know them.

Jack.  Personally, darling, to speak quite candidly, I don't much care
about the name of Ernest . . . I don't think the name suits me at all.

Gwendolen.  It suits you perfectly.  It is a divine name.  It has a music
of its own.  It produces vibrations.

Jack.  Well, really, Gwendolen, I must say that I think there are lots of
other much nicer names.  I think Jack, for instance, a charming name.

Gwendolen.  Jack? . . . No, there is very little music in the name Jack,
if any at all, indeed.  It does not thrill.  It produces absolutely no
vibrations . . . I have known several Jacks, and they all, without
exception, were more than usually plain.  Besides, Jack is a notorious
domesticity for John!  And I pity any woman who is married to a man
called John.  She would probably never be allowed to know the entrancing
pleasure of a single moment's solitude.  The only really safe name is
Ernest.

Jack.  Gwendolen, I must get christened at once--I mean we must get
married at once.  There is no time to be lost.

Gwendolen.  Married, Mr. Worthing?

Jack.  [Astounded.]  Well . . . surely.  You know that I love you, and
you led me to believe, Miss Fairfax, that you were not absolutely
indifferent to me.

Gwendolen.  I adore you.  But you haven't proposed to me yet.  Nothing
has been said at all about marriage.  The subject has not even been
touched on.

Jack.  Well . . . may I propose to you now?

Gwendolen.  I think it would be an admirable opportunity.  And to spare
you any possible disappointment, Mr. Worthing, I think it only fair to
tell you quite frankly before-hand that I am fully determined to accept
you.

Jack.  Gwendolen!

Gwendolen.  Yes, Mr. Worthing, what have you got to say to me?

Jack.  You know what I have got to say to you.

Gwendolen.  Yes, but you don't say it.

